 
 
The Gentrification of Harlem? 
Author(s): Richard Schaffer and  Neil Smith 
Source: Annals of the Association of American Geographers,  Vol. 76, No. 3 (Sep., 1986), pp. 
347-365 
Published by: Taylor & Francis on behalf of the Association of American Geographers 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2562585 
Accessed: 26-07-2026 03:50 UTC 
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide 
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and 
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Taylor & Francis, Association of American Geographers  are collaborating with JSTOR to 
digitize, preserve and extend access to Annals of the Association of American Geographers 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
The Gentrification of Harlem? 
Richard Schaffer* and Neil Smitht 
*Division of Urban Planning and Historic Preservation, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 
tDepartment of Geography, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08903 
Abstract. The process of gentrification has begun to affect the majority of large and moderately sized urban areas in the advanced capitalist world, and impressionistic reports suggest that Harlem may be undergoing gentrification. After reviewing some of the debates and arguments in the gentrification literature, we identify a number of indicators from 1980 census data and examine other housing and mortgage data through 1984. The results suggest that indeed gentrification has begun but that there are several potential limitations to the process. The number of wealthy black households in Harlem is relatively small, and if gentrification proceeds it will lead eventually to white in-migration and to the displacement of blacks. 
Key Words: gentrification, Harlem, 1980 census, urban restructuring, displacement, New York City. 
GENTRIFICATION, according to the 1980 
Oxford American Dictionary, is the 
"movement of middle class families into urban 
areas causing property values to increase and 
having [the] secondary effect of driving out 
poorer families." Although the process often 
involves the rehabilitation of residential neigh- 
borhoods occupied by the working class, it can 
also occur in nonresidential areas where the 
building stock is economically obsolete but suf- 
ficiently sound that rehabilitation is viable. New 
York's SoHo, for example, was a predominantly 
industrial area as were many other recently gen- 
trified areas occupying a waterfront location 
(Zukin 1982). Gentrification began as a predomi- 
nantly residential process but in recent years 
has become more broadly based, involving a 
fundamental restructuring of central and inner 
city land uses (Fainstein and Fainstein 1982; 
Smith and Williams 1986). Along with residen- 
tial restructuring, the process especially 
involves commercial redevelopment (boutiques 
for food, furniture, and pets as well as for 
clothes) and a new development of recreational 
facilities (from fern bars and discos to marinas 
and tourist arcades, such as Baltimore's Har- 
borplace or London's Covent Garden). In dif- 
ferent locations gentrification takes different 
forms, but the common thread is the renovation 
of old inner and central city building stock for 
new uses, generally associated with the middle 
class. Where it is residential property that is 
being renovated, the process usually occurs in working-class areas where the housing stock has 
been devalued through disinvestment or where, 
because of continuing urban development, the 
location of the neighborhood has become 
increasingly prized and therefore more highly 
priced, making gentrification a profitable 
option. 
In this paper we examine the extent to which 
gentrification appears to be affecting Harlem, a 
neighborhood located on Manhattan Island in 
New York City. Perhaps the most trenchant 
national and even international symbol of black 
urban culture, Harlem seems at first sight a 
highly unlikely target for gentrification. Yet 
among Harlem residents, in the local press, and 
even in the international press ("Harlem. Black, 
tan, and white . . ." 1984; Kruger 1985), reports 
of gentrification are emerging. In addition to 
providing an empirical assessment of the pro- 
cess today, we offer conclusions about the 
future of Harlem and assess the conditions that 
could potentially limit gentrification there. 
Background 
As a systematic process, gentrification 
emerged on the heels of the urban renewal, slum 
clearance, and post-war reconstruction pro- 
grams implemented during the 1950s and 1960s 
in most advanced capitalist nations. The term 
gentrification was apparently coined by Ruth 
Glass in the early 1960s: 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 76(3), 1986, pp. 347-365 ? Copyright 1986 by Association of American Geographers 
347
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
348 Schaffer and Smith 
One by one, many of the working-class quarters of London have been invaded by the middle classes- upper and lower. Shabby, modest mews and cot- tages-two rooms up and two down-have been taken over, when their leases have expired, and have become elegant, expensive residences. Larger Victorian houses, downgraded in an earlier or recent period-which were used as lodging houses or were otherwise in multiple occupation-have been upgraded once again.... Once this process of "gentrification" starts in a district it goes on rap- idly until all or most of the original working class occupiers are displaced and the whole social char- acter of the district is changed (Glass 1964, xviii). 
This is not the first period in which residential 
rehabilitation has occurred; there was sporadic 
rehabilitation in numerous nineteenth-century 
European cities, and a substantial number of 
urban workers were displaced by "The 
Improvements," as they were called in Britain, 
or by embourgeoisement, as it was called in 
France (Rodger 1982; Harvey 1985, 94-96). The 
difference between earlier experiences of reha- 
bilitation and contemporary gentrification is that 
the latter is far more systematic and widespread; 
it is an international not a national process and 
is synchronized with larger economic, political, 
and social changes (Smith 1982; Kendig 1984; 
Williams 1984). Within affected cities it is highly 
concentrated spatially. It occurs especially, but 
not exclusively, in the inner city areas around 
the Central Business District, the area that used 
to be described in traditional Chicago School 
and ecological models of urban structure as the 
zone of transition (Burgess 1925; Griffin and 
Preston 1966; Rex 1968). If such areas are again 
in transition, it is an upward transition rather 
than the downward one envisioned by tradi- 
tional theorists. 
As the effects of gentrification emerged more 
clearly in the public eye and indeed as the pro- 
cess seemed to accelerate in many cities in the 
mid-1970s, a flurry of research began (for sur- 
veys see Laska and Spain 1980; Palen and Lon- 
don 1984; Smith and Williams 1986). In the 
United States this work tended to be highly 
empirical (e.g., Gale 1977; Laska and Spain 
1980) whereas in Britain empirical investigations 
were tempered by a concern for theory (Wil- 
liams 1976; Hamnett 1973). From this work it 
has become clear that there are obvious limita- 
tions to narrow, empirical (sometimes empiri- 
cist) case studies of gentrifying neighborhoods; 
equally clear are the limits to more abstract 
theorizing that may well identify some of the 
salient causes of the process but often does so at the expense of conveying the diversity of expe- 
rience involved in gentrification (Holcomb and 
Beauregard 1981; Hamnett 1984; D. Rose 1984). 
The complexities of the process should neither 
become an excuse for neglecting the general 
patterns that prevail nor be dismissed as epi- 
phenomenal irrelevancies. It is from this con- 
viction of the necessity to match theoretical and 
empirical investigation that the present study of 
the gentrification of Harlem proceeds. 
Debate over gentrification has emerged 
around three main questions: the significance of 
the process (or its extent), the effects of gentrifi- 
cation, and its causes. Under these three head- 
ings we shall attempt to summarize very briefly 
the major arguments. It will quickly become 
obvious that these three issues are closely inter- 
related. 
Significance 
In 1970 U.S. census data, probable signs of 
gentrification began to show up at the scale of 
individual cities. The process was tightly con- 
centrated in a few neighborhoods accounting for 
a very small percentage of the overall area of 
individual cities (Lipton 1977). In the mid-1970s, 
a survey of local officials by the Urban Land 
Institute (1976) suggested that nearly half of 
U.S. cities with over 50,000 population were 
experiencing some level of rehabilitation in the 
inner city housing market. If there is little 
debate on these findings as such, there is cer- 
tainly debate over what they mean. 1980 census 
data have been analyzed so far only at the 
neighborhood level for individual cities; 
researchers have not yet repeated Lipton's 
(1977) broader analysis for the nation's largest 
cities.
The debate is essentially this: is gentrification 
a small-scale, geographically restricted process 
that has little or no effect on the city as a whole, 
or is it the harbinger of a major restructuring of 
urban space? Advocates of what we might call 
the minimalist position, generally resort to data 
at the city or metropolitan scale to demonstrate 
the continuation of urban decline and the subur- 
banization of whites (e.g., Berry 1985), even if 
in some cases at reduced rates (see Nelson 
1984). Only a few of the most accessible neigh- 
borhoods have been affected. In policy terms, 
gentrification is therefore seen as a solution to 
the urban problem "and the problem of urban 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Gentrification of Harlem 349 
housing" (Sumka 1979) and should therefore be 
encouraged. In the words of Sternlieb and 
Hughes (1983, 467) gentrification is a "triumph" 
that can potentially bring higher property tax 
returns and thereby enhance the "economic 
vigor" of the city (see also Kern 1981). 
Against this some researchers argue that gen- 
trification is part of a larger restructuring of 
urban space that is clearly well under way. This 
is most obvious in U.S. cities where there may 
already be "convergence toward the European 
model" of urban structure (Fainstein and Fain- 
stein 1982). This model is characterized by a his- 
torically preserved urban center where numer- 
ous high-income residential areas have been 
maintained and where elite retail and commer- 
cial establishments are concentrated. Some see 
this "social Manhattanization" as already 
clearly evident in many U.S. cities (Williams 
and Smith 1986). Proponents of this position 
generally resort to data at the micro level 
(census tract or neighborhood), where the pro- 
fundity of change from gentrification is most 
apparent. 
Effects 
The debate here is more complex and con- 
cerns the overall costs and benefits of gentrifi- 
cation. In what is probably the majority view, 
and one that certainly dominates most official 
policy toward the process, gentrification is 
lauded as the major hope for reversing the eco- 
nomic and social decline that still dominates the 
inner cities. The benefits, in terms of rehabili- 
tated housing units, higher tax revenues, and a 
generally greater "economic vigor" are held to 
exceed the costs, especially displacement. In 
the first place, then, there is an argument over 
the extent to which poor and working-class resi- 
dents are displaced from gentrifying areas, with 
proponents of gentrification maintaining that the 
extent of displacement and its effects are rela- 
tively unimportant. During the Carter presi- 
dency, when the administration actively 
attempted to encourage "revitalization," the 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Devel- 
opment (1979, 1981) eventually acknowledged 
displacement as a problem but downplayed its 
importance; 2 percent was the unofficial but 
widely accepted approximation of annual dis- 
placement in gentrifying neighborhoods. 
Although evidence is admittedly thin, available results suggest low rates of displacement, and so 
according to this argument no anti-displacement 
policies need be implemented; these would be 
premature and might retard "revitalization" 
(Sumka 1979). 
Against this view, more recent evidence sug- 
gests that as many as 23 percent of departing 
residents in gentrifying neighborhoods are dis- 
placed (Schill and Nathan 1983, 7). Hartman 
(1979) and LeGates and Hartman (1981) have 
argued, on the basis of an exhaustive survey of 
displacement reports, that the problem is wide- 
spread, that government figures themselves 
indicate that 500,000 families are displaced 
annually from their homes, and that gentrifica- 
tion accounts for a sizable minority of these. 
Beyond the statistics, the impressionistic evi- 
dence suggests that the problem is real. The fear 
of gentrification in target neighborhoods is cer- 
tainly widely reported (e.g., Daniels 1983a), and 
in areas where the process has begun, everyone 
has a story about old friends and families next 
door who were moved out. 
Opponents of gentrification therefore attempt 
to point out that the costs of the process are 
unevenly felt and that the notion of overall gain 
for the city is misleading. "The city" is not an 
undifferentiated pool of abstractly equal individ- 
uals but rather comprises a stratified population 
whose experience of gentrification is highly dif- 
ferentiated (Smith and LeFaivre 1984). Some 
gain and some lose. In a recent survey, which 
suffers from some vital methodological prob- 
lems, Schill and Nathan (1983, 119) assert that 
although displaced households face higher 
rental costs, they may also respond to ques- 
tioners that their housing is better and they feel 
better off. Displacement is thereby construed as 
potentially beneficial to working-class residents, 
and it is a short step from here to a policy of 
benign neglect. This view has been flatly 
rejected as systematically underestimating the 
adverse effects of gentrification (Hartman, 
Keating, and LeGates 1982; LeGates and Hart- 
man 1986). 
Causes 
The strictly ecological explanations referred 
to above-the treatment of gentrification as a 
re-invasion of the zone of transition-have cer- 
tainly been invoked as well as critiqued (London 
1980). But such explanations of an apparent 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
350 Schaffer and Smith 
reversal in social ecological patterns have gener- 
ally been post hoc; description is construed as 
explanation, with little or no insight into the 
deeper reasons for urban change. Thus the 
debate over causes has come to center on the 
issue of production-based vs. consumption- 
based explanations. Especially in the U.S. the 
process has generally been explained as a result 
of changing lifestyles and demographic changes 
(the maturation of the baby boom generation, 
higher numbers of single adults living together, 
higher female labor force participation rates, 
and so forth). Together these lead to altered 
consumption patterns and preferences, leading 
to a heightened pattern of demand for housing. 
Some of these ideas have been challenged 
(e.g., Walker and Greenberg 1982), and an alter- 
native tradition has developed emphasizing the 
role of the state and capital in producing both 
the potential and the reality of gentrification. 
Williams (1976, 1978) emphasizes the role of 
British building societies in providing the capital 
for transforming the inner city landscape. 
Others have theorized that it is the longer-term 
movement of capital in the built environment, 
creating a "rent gap" in the inner city, that 
creates the opportunity for profitable capital 
reinvestment in redevelopment or housing reha- 
bilitation. More generally, some form of "col- 
lective social action" rather than individual 
decision making is necessary to promote the 
process (Smith 1979, 545; 1982). The emphasis 
here is squarely on the primary role of capital 
(private or public) in fashioning the urban land- 
scape. Clearly production and consumption 
must be related, but the determination of how 
they are related and which predominates cannot 
be made on the basis of empirical studies alone. 
Each of the different positions in this debate, 
then, involves a larger theoretical commitment 
concerning the way in which urban space is 
continually patterned and repatterned. 
We cannot address all of the questions pro- 
voked in these debates in the context of Harlem. 
In particular because gentrification in Harlem is 
at best in its infancy and because the area has an 
inordinate number of vacant and abandoned 
buildings, it will be difficult to use this empirical 
study to advance our knowledge of the effects of 
gentrification. Precisely because the process is 
in its infancy, however, this study can offer 
some clues concerning causes, and because of 
the presumed difficulty of Harlem as a target for 
the process, the study should also yield some 
conclusions on the significance of gentrification. Finally, there is the question of methodology 
and particularly the issue of how to identify gen- 
trifying neighborhoods within Harlem. There 
has been remarkably little discussion of this 
question in the literature and so a further aim of 
this paper is to begin to identify statistical indi- 
cators of gentrification. Most previous research 
has tended to rely on the impressions of local 
"experts" (planners, academics, real estate 
agents, community activists) as indicators of 
the process because sufficiently sensitive 
neighborhood-level data were scarce. As Clay 
(1979b, 40) concluded, "statistical indicators are 
not likely to yield early clues to middle-class 
reinvestment." In fact, as gentrification 
matures, statistical indicators are increasingly 
available. One would expect to see changes in 
the occupational and socioeconomic character 
of affected neighborhoods as well as in the prop- 
erty market, and indicators are available for 
identifying such changes. Specifically, one 
would expect increases in the percentage of col- 
lege graduates and of professionals in gentrify- 
ing neighborhoods, and these data are available 
in census reports. Neither is a sensitive indica- 
tor, however. The spatial distribution of college 
graduates is highly differentiated, but some of 
the most dramatic increases in this indicator 
appear in poor neighborhoods where 1970 levels 
were extremely low. The percentage of profes- 
sionals might have been a sharp indicator, but 
occupational definitions changed sufficiently 
between the 1970 and 1980 censuses that the 
results are not comparable. 
Two indicators do emerge, however, from the 
census. Income and rent levels increase dramat- 
ically in most gentrifying neighborhoods; per 
capita income provides the most sensitive indi- 
cator of income changes, and median contract 
rent offers the most comparable data on housing 
costs. Beyond the census, housing market data 
give a fairly clear picture of reversals in the 
devaluation cycle (Smith 1979) and the begin- 
nings of reinvestment. We propose these as sta- 
tistical indicators that are sufficiently sensitive 
to detect gentrification in Harlem and also have 
wider applicability. 
Harlem as a Target for Gentrification 
Harlem is an international symbol of black 
culture. Two themes dominate most contempo- 
rary images of Harlem. The first, a nostalgic 
image now, is the Harlem of the Harlem Renais- 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Gentrification of Harlem 351 
sance or of the Black Panthers (Anderson 1982; 
Lewis 1981). The second theme is Harlem the 
ghetto, one of the largest concentrations of 
black working-class and poor inhabitants in the 
U.S. (Osofsky 1971). Along with this image goes 
a picture of physical dilapidation, social depri- 
vation, crime, and drugs. If the two themes are 
different, they are not incompatible; each 
obviously portrays only a part of the real Har- 
lem. In the first place, then, this is a case study 
of the extent of gentrification in an internation- 
ally known black neighborhood. 
Constructed initially as a mixed middle- and 
working-class area in the last decades of the 
nineteenth century and located on the north 
edge of Central Park in Manhattan (Fig. 1), Har- 
lem's housing stock is comprised of five- and 
six-story tenements and townhouses.1 As the 
white middle class moved out to the suburbs and 
the black migration from the South accelerated 
during World War I, Harlem's population 
became increasingly black, and by the 1920s the 
Harlem Renaissance placed the area squarely at 
the forefront of black culture. New construction 
had effectively ceased by the beginning of the 
war, however, and housing disinvestment began 
seriously during the Depression. Ever since, 
there has been little significant reinvestment in 
Harlem except for undertakings that were partly 
or wholly funded by the state. By the time that 
Harlem again made international headlines in 
the 1960s, it had been transformed into a slum 
and quickly became the most notorious symbol 
of black deprivation in America. 
Although the neighborhood's history of disin- 
vestment and decline is typical of other neigh- 
borhoods facing gentrification, Harlem is quite 
atypical in other ways. Most important, Harlem 
is a solidly black area. According to the 1980 
census, 96 percent of Central Harlem residents 
are black. Gentrification in the U.S. has cer- 
tainly led to the displacement of black and other 
minority populations, but because many of the 
black urban neighborhoods had been targeted 
earlier by urban renewal and because white 
middle-class gentrifiers have generally been less 
squeamish about moving into white working- 
class areas, the earliest neighborhoods affected 
by gentrification have usually been white or at 
least mixed. With some exceptions, heavily 
black neighborhoods have been perceived as 
harder to gentrify. An obvious exception is Cap- 
itol Hill in Washington, D.C. (Gale 1977), which 
has undergone gentrification since the 
mid-1960s, but this comparison points to 0 1 2 3km 
0 1 2mi 
2) MON ; \ 4THE BRONX 
155T STt 
CENTRAL HMILTON HARLEM HEIGHTS 
I? ~~~~125TH 5T. 
MORNINGSIDE PARK
UPECENTRA~L 
PARKYORK VILL WESTSIDE Q~~~~UEENS 
NEW II~.6 JERSEY f II
CLINTON 42ND ST 
CHELSEA - 
o-Z ____ 14TH ST 
- GREENWICH ~. VILLAGE LOWER -~~~~ ~EAST SOHO SIDE 
TRIBECA 
BROOKLYN 
Figure 1. Manhattan and Central Harlem. 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
352 Schaffer and Smith 
another important characteristic of Harlem: its 
size. Harlem is much larger than Capitol Hill. 
Its total population is over 300,000 and it covers 
an area of about four square miles. Perceived by 
the middle class (especially the white middle 
class) as highly threatening, having a universally 
depressed housing market, and possessing a 
cohesive social and political identity, Harlem 
represents a challenging obstacle for gentrifica- 
tion in New York City. Its location on the other 
hand-immediately north of Central Park from 
midtown Manhattan-does promise consider- 
able economic opportunity for developers who 
initiate gentrification. With this much at stake, it 
is little wonder that on the one side Harlem is 
seen as a supreme test for the gentrification pro- 
cess, while on the other gentrification is seen as 
a powerful threat to Harlem residents who are 
dependent on the availability of housing at rents 
well below Manhattan market levels. 
Harlem is susceptible to gentrification primar- 
ily because of its location. During the 1970s, 
New York City lost population, falling from a 
peak of nearly 8 million in 1971 to just over 7 
million in 1980. (It has since stabilized and even 
registered marginal population increases.) Man- 
hattan followed this trend, falling from 1.54 to 
1.43 million during the decade, but in the same 
period the number of households in Manhattan 
actually increased by 2.5 percent (Stegman 
1982). Along with this increase in households, 
the gentrification process, which had certainly 
been evident in the city before 1970, began to 
flourish, especially in the southern and western 
parts of Manhattan. SoHo, Tribeca, the Lower 
East Side, Chelsea, Clinton, and the Upper 
West Side all experienced considerable rehabili- 
tation of old building stock (Fig. 1). By the late 
1970s, Harlem represented Manhattan's largest 
concentration of working-class residences with 
virtually no gentrification. Thus, despite the 
continued population loss at the city level during 
the 1970s, gentrification shows up strongly for 
the first time with census-tract data from the 
1980 census, especially in Manhattan but also in 
Brooklyn. A recent study by Chall (1984) docu- 
ments the process in New York City but seri- 
ously underestimates its extent.2 It is against 
this background of extensive rehabilitation in 
areas closer to midtown Manhattan, rapidly ris- 
ing housing costs and rent levels, and an 
extremely low citywide vacancy rate of about 2 
percent that the gentrification of Harlem has 
come onto the agenda. There are several purposes, then, to this 
study. First, it offers a case study of an urban 
area with an international reputation; the gentri- 
fication of Harlem would indeed be an an event 
of some significance. Second, this study docu- 
ments the process at its inception, therefore 
providing a base line against which future trends 
can be assessed. Partly out of disbelief that past 
trends would be reversed, most researchers 
have tended to study neighborhoods only after 
gentrification is an accomplished fact. Even if 
the process is truncated or halted, a study of its 
origins can assist in comprehending the reasons 
for success or failure. Third, this study is meant 
to cast some light on the debates over the causes 
and significance of the process. There is little 
disagreement that Harlem represents a difficult 
target for gentrification; to the extent that it 
takes place, we should be more inclined to see 
the general process of gentrification as tren- 
chant and long term. If it were temporary and 
small in scale, why would developers and 
incoming residents make such long-term invest- 
ments here rather than in neighborhoods per- 
ceived as socially and economically less risky? 
The present study will also make tentative con- 
clusions about the potential effects of the pro- 
cess in Harlem and will contribute to the discus- 
sion over production-side and consumption-side 
explanations. The theoretical conclusions, how- 
ever, will be limited and tentative, pointing in 
certain directions rather than claiming to prove 
or disprove specific theoretical propositions. 
The Study Area 
There are different definitions of Harlem, but 
it is generally considered to be the area stretch- 
ing for two miles north of Central Park in Man- 
hattan. On the East Side it extends south to 96th 
Street while on the West Side it goes only to 
125th Street. Generally, it includes Manhattan's 
Community Districts 10 and 11 and most of the 
northern part of Community District 9. During 
the late 1970s and early 1980s, some new con- 
struction and renovation began in the eastern 
section above 96th Street, and there were also 
the beginnings of renovation in the western sec- 
tion, especially in Hamilton Heights. But the 
heart of Harlem lies in the central area directly 
north of the Park. Unless this area of Central 
Harlem is gentrified, it is unlikely that the reha- 
bilitation and new construction along the edges 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Gentrification of Harlem 353 
Table 1. Statistical Profile of Central Harlem Population and Housing, 1980 
Central Harlem Manhattan 
Percent population black 96.1 21.7 Per capita income ($) 4,308 10,992 Percent high-income households (?$50,000) 0.5 8.4 Percent low-income households (<$10,000) 65.5 37.4 Percent college graduates (adults with : 4 years of college) 5.2 33.2 Median contract rent ($ per month) 149 198 Percent managerial, professional, and related occupations 15.9 41.7 Private residential property turnover rate per year, 1980-84 (%) 3.3 5.0 Population change, 1970-80 (%) -33.6 - 7.2 Percent housing abandoned 24.2 5.3 
Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census (1972, 1983); City of New York, Department of City Planning (1981); Real Estate Board of New York (1985). 
will amount to anything very significant. Thus 
far, media reports of gentrification have focused 
more on the eastern and western edges of Har- 
lem, with far fewer reports of activity in the 
central area. We therefore take Central Harlem 
as the focus of our research. 
The study area is defined by the boundaries of 
Community District 10 (Fig. 1). This area 
stretches from 110th Street in the south to 155th 
Street in the north, and from Fifth Avenue in the 
east to Morningside and St. Nicholas parks in 
the west. Table 1 provides a statistical profile of 
the area, comparing it with Manhattan averages 
in order to emphasize the social, physical, and 
economic contrast between Harlem and the rest 
of Manhattan. The picture conveyed by these 
statistics is clear. Central Harlem's population is 
predominantly poor, working class, and almost 
totally black; it has declined by one-third in the 
last decade. Proportionately Central Harlem has 
a tiny middle class, a low percentage of college 
graduates, and a small number of high-income 
households. Median rents are 25 percent lower 
than the Manhattan average, one-quarter of all 
housing units are abandoned, housing condi- 
tions are bad, and the private housing market is 
soft. The contrast with the rest of Manhattan 
could hardly be more marked. Within this gen- 
eral picture, however, there is considerable vari- 
ation.
The study proceeds with an examination of 
1980 census data and the changes that took 
place during the 1970s. From this we shall be 
able to identify areas, roughly at first, where 
some sort of social, economic, and physical 
change may be beginning. We then look at more 
detailed data, especially on the housing market, which will give a more refined and more up-to- 
date view of changes taking place in the area. 
We conclude with an assessment of changes that 
have occurred, a discussion of the limits and 
constraints upon the gentrification process in 
Central Harlem, and an attempt to assess the 
likely effects of the process on present resi- 
dents.
Census Results for Central 
Harlem, 1970-1980 
We first examine several key indicators from 
the 1980 census for evidence of gentrification in 
Harlem. In particular, we examine changes over 
the decade in per capita income, median family 
income, median contract rent, and racial com- 
position. The most obvious pattern to emerge 
from these data is the continuation of decline. 
While per capita income in Manhattan increased 
by 105.2 percent during the 1970s (with no cor- 
rection for inflation) and by 96.5 percent 
throughout New York City, in Central Harlem 
the increase was only 77.8 percent, about 20 
percentage points lower than the inflation rate 
for the decade. The standard of living for Cen- 
tral Harlem residents therefore dropped mark- 
edly during the 1970s. As might be expected, the 
decline of real income was even more marked in 
terms of median family income. Median con- 
tract rent, on the other hand, rose by 113 per- 
cent, further exacerbating the decrease in living 
standards, although again this was lower than 
the Manhattan and New York City averages 
(which were 141 percent and 125 percent, 
respectively). The percentage of blacks 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
354 Schaffer and Smith 
remained steady at 96.1 percent compared with 
96.3 percent in 1970 (U.S. Bureau of the Census 
1972, 1983). 
But this general trend of economic decline is 
not universal. A disaggregation of the data at the 
census-tract level provides clear evidence of an 
opposite trend in some areas. The most sensi- 
tive indicator was per capita income, and the 
second most sensitive was median contract rent. 
In nine tracts, per capita income increased more 
than the city average, and in these same tracts 
rent increases were also generally above the 
local average, indicating a change in the housing 
market as well as a change in the social and eco- 
nomic status of residents. We would expect per 
capita income increases to be a more sensitive 
indicator of gentrification than median family 
income because figures for family income do not 
include unrelated individuals, who are usually 
prominent in gentrification. (In Central Harlem, 
only five census tracts demonstrate above- 
average increases in family income, and in at 
least three of these tracts, it is highly unlikely 
that any gentrification is taking place.) The 
question is whether there is a spatial pattern to 
these larger-than-average increases in per capita 
income. Such a pattern would be expected in 
the case of gentrification because the process 
tends to be tightly concentrated in specific 
blocks and neighborhoods, at least in the begin- 
ning. Figure 2 shows the distribution of census 
tracts with increases in per capita income that 
are above the city average, and it is immediately 
evident that a distinct spatial concentration 
exists. There are two corridors of more rapidly 
rising incomes, one on the western edge of the 
district, the other on the eastern edge. But is 
this pattern the result of gentrification, or does it 
result from some other set of processes? To pro- 
vide a preliminary answer we look at specific 
census tracts; this will not tell us definitely 
which of the tracts are experiencing gentrifica- 
tion, but it will help us to eliminate those tracts 
where income rose rapidly for other reasons. 
The pattern that emerges from this closer 
examination is that while gentrification might be 
occurring in the western corridor, the idea of an 
eastern corridor of gentrification is not tenable. 
The eastern corridor, from 126th Street to 139th 
Street (Fig. 2), comprises a low- and moderate- 
income urban renewal project (Lenox Terrace) 
as well as several blocks of severely deterio- 
rated tenements and townhouses. There is no 
obvious explanation for the above-average 155TH ST L 
JACKIq ROBINSOIN' PARKI -~; 
145TH ST 
ST NICHOA S PARK C 135TH ST- 
0 w k
125TH ST HARLEM STATE OFFICE BUILDIN MARCUS GAR VEY' 
PAPARK 
l k
Li1/2mi 
Figure 2. Above-average increase in per capita income, 1970-80. 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Gentrification of Harlem 355 
increases in income here, but it is at least possi- 
ble that this part of Harlem is experiencing some 
spinoff effect from the concentration of office 
employment (since 1971) in the new Harlem 
State Office Building, immediately to the south 
on 125th Street. Field observation discloses no 
signs of significant residential rehabilitation or 
redevelopment since 1970, and we are inclined 
to conclude that the area is not experiencing any 
gentrification. The remaining tract in the eastern 
corridor, to the south of Marcus Garvey Park, 
may however be undergoing the beginnings of 
gentrification. There has been some rehabilita- 
tion of townhouses here, and the area has been 
targeted by the City of New York in its auction 
of city-owned properties (see below). At best, 
however, the process is in its infancy. 
In the western corridor, there is firmer evi- 
dence of the beginnings of gentrification. The 
indicators suggest an above-average increase in 
income and rental indicators, especially above 
126th Street, and there is an areawide increase 
in high-income households, but the data on the 
number of professionals and college graduates is 
more ambiguous. This is particularly surprising 
because the western corridor borders on the 
City College of New York, which would be 
expected to contribute graduates and "profes- 
sionals" to the gentrification process. Still, the 
census data suggest the real possibility of gen- 
trification beginning in this area. A more precise 
analysis demands that we examine a broader 
range of data, especially concerning the housing 
market. 
Housing Market Trends Since 1980 
Between 1980 and 1984 there are ambiguous 
trends in the Central Harlem housing market, 
and these are shown in Figure 3, which graphs 
data on the volume and value of private residen- 
tial sales (Real Estate Board of New York 1985). 
The first trend is the decline in volume of sales 
in 1982 with the onset of the national recession; 
this was matched by a decline of prices in 1983. 
There is little doubt that these declines repre- 
sent national trends; nationally, sales volume 
declined 17.5 percent in 1982 over the previous 
year, and prices actually declined in many parts 
of the country for the first time in over a decade 
("Home sales low . . ." 1983). But the second 
important trend is that although the volume of 
sales did not pick up appreciably after the end of $120,000 
on-- --to NNumber of sales 
o, - ------ -0 Sale price 100,000 
802000 
120 - 40,000 
100
80 - 40,000 
60-
4o ~~~~~~~~~TENEMENt4TS ANO 4ALET8 - - _ 2.0 
20 -
1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 
Figure 3. Volume and value of private sales, 1980-84. 
the recession in 1983, prices rose dramatically in 
1984. This would tend to support the general 
perception of realtors, public officials, and resi- 
dents of the area that the market has heated up 
considerably but that there remains something 
of a wait-and-see attitude among potential 
investors; speculative investment has increased 
since 1984 but appears to involve smaller rather 
than larger investors (C. Douglas 1986). 
As with the census results, these sales data 
for the area as a whole do not give the full pic- 
ture. Figure 4 shows the geographical distribu- 
tion of the turnover rate of private residential 
properties in the five years from 1980 to 1984. 
The map shows that the highest rate of private 
sales occurs in and around the same western 
corridor that emerged from the census data as a 
possible locus of gentrification. Further it is 
apparent that in the most active areas, turnover 
rates are over 7 percent per year, appreciably 
more than the Manhattan rate of 5 percent and 
more than the 3.3 percent rate for Central Har- 
lem as a whole. 
This indication of increased activity in the real 
estate market concurs with earlier results. The 
Harlem Urban Development Corporation (1982) 
concluded that in the area of the West Harlem 
South Triangle-the southwest section of the 
study area bounded on the south by 110th 
Street, on the west by Manhattan and Morning- 
side avenues, and on the northeast by the St. 
Nicholas Avenue diagonal (see Fig. 2)-there 
was a considerable increase in sales activity 
between 1978 and 1981. A subsequent report 
reached a similar conclusion (AKRF 1982). The 
data through 1984 suggest a secular strengthen- 
ing of this trend in the western corridor as a 
whole. 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
356 Schaffer and Smith 
L "I toless than 20% 
... . . . . A 20-34.9% 
\\... X 35% and over 
W.;
o 1km lI lo 1/2mi 
Figure 4. Private residential turnover rates, 1980-84. Although it is the western corridor that 
emerges as the area undergoing significant 
changes in social composition and in the housing 
market, there are two other parts of Central 
Harlem where rehabilitation and redevelopment 
are beginning to take place. First, there is the 
Harlem Gateway area, the name of which sug- 
gests vividly the intentions of federal and local 
agencies. Lying between 110th and 112th 
streets, Fifth Avenue and Manhattan Avenue, 
the major asset of the Gateway is that it hugs the 
northern edge of Central Park (Fig. 2). This area 
was designated a Neighborhood Strategy Area 
by HUD in 1979, meaning that it was targeted 
for HUD's major development programs and is 
also targeted by Harlem Urban Development 
Corporation and various City agencies. By 1982, 
there were at least five Section 8 low- and mod- 
erate-income federal projects active in the area, 
providing substantial rehabilitation of nearly 450 
housing units. Since then, several new projects 
have been announced, and it is recognized today 
that this area is on the "verge of major redevel- 
opment" (Daniels 1984). Most important are 
several condominium projects being undertaken 
both on Lenox Avenue and on the western edge 
of the Gateway. At least four new or renovated 
condominium buildings are in the planning or 
construction phase, several of them involving 
coalitions of local developers. The largest and 
most significant development, however, is a 
599-unit condominium being constructed by the 
Rockefeller-inspired New York City Housing 
Partnership. Ground for this project was broken 
in October 1985. 
The significance of the Housing Partnership 
condominiums-named Towers on the Park- 
lies in the extraordinary financial undertaking 
involved. In the summer of 1985 the City 
received a $6 million Federal Urban Develop- 
ment Action Grant to subsidize the condomin- 
iums, and this triggered an unprecedented 
Chemical Bank loan of $47 million to finance 
construction (Oser 1985). This is by far the larg- 
est private residential capital investment in Har- 
lem in decades and nearly eight times the total 
private mortgage financing that went into the 
whole of Central Harlem in 1982. In this one 
development can be seen both the severity of 
redlining in the past and the potential for gentri- 
fication in the future. As construction begins, 
the total projected cost of Towers on the Park is 
$70.5 million; while some units are to be ear- 
marked for moderate-income tenants at approxi- 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Gentrification of Harlem 357 
mately $60,000, the majority will be sold, 
according to current estimates, at between 
$80,000 and $125,000 (Oser 1985). 
The second area of some activity since 1982 is 
the area around Marcus Garvey Park. The 
census data on income and rent give a mixed 
picture, suggesting above-average increases in 
the tract to the south (Fig. 2) but below-average 
increases immediately adjacent to the park. 
Most of the activity in this area began two years 
ago when the City began its sealed bid auction 
program with 12 brownstone properties that had 
been taken in property tax foreclosure proceed- 
ings. Three-quarters of these were in the imme- 
diate vicinity of Marcus Garvey Park. The prop- 
erties were to be rehabilitated by those who won 
the auction, in what was seen as a trial run by 
the City. According to Roy Miller, Director of 
the Harlem Office of Community Development 
and Neighborhood Preservation, only 1 of the 12 
properties had been completely renovated two 
years after the auction and 7 were still awaiting 
the beginning of construction (pers. comm., 
April 13, 1984). Nonetheless the City adminis- 
tration was determined to continue the auction 
program and to expand it. The area around 
Marcus Garvey Park has remained a prominent 
focus in this program and has also been high- 
lighted in media publicity (Daniels 1983b; 
Coombs 1982). Between January 1980 and June 
1983, a total of 30 townhouses were sold in the 
tract adjacent to the park, the third highest total 
for Central Harlem. Physical inspection of the 
area also indicates significant rehabilitation 
activity. 
The Extent of Gentrification 
The western corridor of Central Harlem is 
experiencing the beginning of gentrification. 
Above-average increases in income and rent 
levels as well as in the number of high-income 
families were matched by a rapid increase in 
sales activity. This simultaneously rising prop- 
erty market and rising socioeconomic profile in 
the neighborhood constitute the hallmark of 
gentrification. Further, this combination is 
unlikely to occur in Harlem for any other rea- 
son. The socioeconomic change indicates that 
the heating up of the property market is not sim- 
ply the result of speculation, although the latter 
certainly occurs (C. Douglas 1986), most likely 
beginning with the early 1980s surge in property values. Likewise, the rising property market 
indicates that socioeconomic changes in the 
western corridor are tied to an upward revalua- 
tion of the physical structures. Also significant 
is the fact that in this western corridor there is 
no detectable racial change, no white influx. 
This suggests that so far we are witnessing a 
process of black gentrification. 
Although gentrification has begun in the west- 
ern corridor, albeit on a small scale, it is impor- 
tant to be cautious about its extent. Even in this 
area, which is most affected, the process is as 
yet very sporadic. Beyond the western corridor, 
only Marcus Garvey Park and the Gateway 
appear to have experienced gentrification, and 
there too it is both sporadic and preliminary. 
To emphasize the preliminary character of the 
process, it is possible to compare sales data for 
Central Harlem with similar data for other 
clearly gentrifying areas in Manhattan. Whereas 
Central Harlem had a total of 635 residential 
property transactions in the five-year period 
from 1980 to 1984 (for a total of $30 million and 
an average sale price of $47,500) clearly gentri- 
fying areas of Manhattan such as Yorkville and 
Clinton (Fig. 1) experienced much greater levels 
of activity. Yorkville, on the eastern border of 
East Harlem and the Upper East Side, had 121 
transactions in 1980 and 1981 for a total of 
$106.1 million and an average price of $877,000. 
Clinton, west of Eighth Avenue between 42nd 
and 57th streets, had 142 sales in the same two- 
year period for a total of nearly $46 million and 
an average sale price of $322,000 (AKRF 1982). 
Although these data are not strictly comparable 
because they represent different housing stock 
in different areas, the comparison does suggest 
that while the property market in parts of Cen- 
tral Harlem is beginning to show signs of gentri- 
fication, it remains on a comparatively small 
scale. Further, it is important to remember that 
the 1970 base levels of the indicators used here 
(e.g., income, rent) are lower than the city aver- 
age, as are property sale prices, and so large 
percentage increases, especially for the small 
census tracts in the western corridor, do not 
necessarily mean large-scale activity. 
It is worth commenting briefly on the location 
of the upward changes that have begun so far. 
Given that the core of Central Harlem repre- 
sents some of the most deteriorated and deval- 
ued properties, one would expect the process to 
begin at the margins. In some cases, such as the 
northern part of the western corridor, this might 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
358 Schaffer and Smith 
be considered spillover from already gentrifying 
areas such as Hamilton Heights. Elsewhere, 
however, this is not the case; the Marcus Gar- 
vey Park area is not close to any other gentrify- 
ing area, and in the southern sector of the west- 
ern corridor, the metamorphic outcrops of 
Morningside Park have been employed as an 
effective barrier to social and economic inter- 
course between Harlem below and Columbia 
University's Morningside Heights above the 
hill. It can hardly, therefore, be considered 
spillover. Rather, the common denominator 
between these areas is a matter of economic 
gradient-the existence of a severe ground rent 
gradient (Smith 1979), such that land values are 
high to the south and west and inordinately low 
in the middle of Central Harlem. Since it is less 
risky in market terms to attempt to level off the 
rent gradient at the margins where higher land 
values act as an economic anchor than to begin 
in the center, it is the edges that attract initial 
attention. As we shall see below, this is also the 
strategy of the City's Redevelopment Plan for 
Harlem. 
Constraints, Limits and Momentum: 
The Future of Gentrification in 
Central Harlem 
As gentrification is only in its earliest stages 
in Central Harlem, the anticipation of change is 
obviously much greater than the reality. On the 
one hand, local municipal officials and public 
and private real estate developers are promoting 
the possibilities for redeveloping Central Har- 
lem. They emphasize the optimistic potential of 
redevelopment as well as the fragility of the pro- 
cess, the constraints and obstacles, and the 
necessity of overcoming them. On the other 
hand, those who oppose gentrification (because 
wholesale displacement is likely and finding 
adequate and affordable alternative housing is 
difficult) stress the fact that once gentrification 
begins in a neighborhood it is difficult to stop. 
How realistic is this anticipation of the gentri- 
fication of Central Harlem? What are its likely 
effects? Gentrification is a novel process pre- 
cisely because it abrogates previous constraints 
and limitations; it is a reversal in economic and 
social terms. Central Harlem, however, 
presents a more formidable set of constraints 
and limitations than most neighborhoods. We 
shall consider four of these: the supply of gen- trifiers, the negative image of Central Harlem, 
building size and zoning limitations, and the 
supply of private mortgage financing. 
The Supply of Gentrifiers 
At present it is clear that despite prominent 
press reports featuring individual white gentri- 
fiers in Harlem (Coombs 1982), the vast major- 
ity of people involved in rehabilitation and rede- 
velopment in Central Harlem are black. First, 
the census data register no significant decrease 
in the percentage of blacks, even in those areas 
where gentrification appears to be beginning or 
is threatened. In the western corridor, all of the 
tracts remained greater than 90 percent black, 
some almost 100 percent. Second, of the 2,500 
applications received for the first round of the 
City sealed bid auction, approximately 80 per- 
cent were black (Donald Cogsville, President of 
Harlem Urban Development Corporation, pers. 
comm., 1984). What is the likelihood that black 
Harlem residents will be able to carry out the 
major part of the redevelopment and rehabilita- 
tion of Harlem themselves as envisaged in the 
City plan? 
In the 1982 auction, the City required that 
each entrant earn at least $20,000 per year (P. 
Douglas 1983), but in light of the difficulties 
experienced with that auction, the 1985 auction 
was open only to households (or pairs of related 
households) with substantially higher incomes. 
In today's market, rehabilitation costs are esti- 
mated to be more than $135,000 for a medium- 
sized townhouse, and this requires a minimum 
annual household income of between $50,000 
and $87,500 for potential renovators ("Profile of 
a winning sealed bidder" 1985). 
The 1980 census data reveal that only 262 
households in Central Harlem had incomes 
above $50,000. In the whole of Manhattan, the 
number of black households earning more than 
$50,000 did not exceed 1,800. Clearly the gentri- 
fication of Harlem will not proceed far if it is 
simply a process of "incumbent upgrading" (see 
Clay 1979a) by Harlem residents. A similar con- 
clusion was reached by E. M. Green Associates 
in a 1981 marketing study for a co-op building in 
the Gateway area (AKRF 1982). The same 
study, however, concluded that the potential 
would exist among non-Harlem blacks. It is cer- 
tainly possible that the economic vacuum in 
Central Harlem could be filled by non-Harlem 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Gentrification of Harlem 359 
blacks, but it is unlikely. All the empirical 
research on the origin of gentrifiers suggests that 
few of them actually return from the suburbs 
(Laska and Spain 1980; Gale 1977); for every 
returning suburbanite there are an estimated 
four or five gentrifiers already resident in the 
city (Smith 1979). Should Central Harlem follow 
this established trend, its major reservoir of 
potential gentrifiers will be New York City resi- 
dents. If high-income black households are to be 
the main source of gentrifiers, it is doubtful that 
the process will proceed far since there are 
fewer than 8,000 such families (earning over 
$50,000) in all of New York City. The inescap- 
able conclusion is that unless Harlem defies all 
the empirical trends, the process might well 
begin as black gentrification, but any wholesale 
rehabilitation of Central Harlem properties 
would necessarily involve a considerable influx 
of middle- and upper-class whites. This brings 
us to the second constraint. 
The Image of Central Harlem 
If the gentrification of Central Harlem is 
dependent on a substantial white influx, white 
perceptions of the area are critical. To the vast 
majority of middle-class whites, Central Harlem 
is perceived as a dangerous place. However 
accurate this image, it is also perceived as a 
black-defined geographical space in the city, and 
by this fact alone is therefore threatening. Thus 
it is impossible to disentangle white middle-class 
fear from racist perceptions about the area. The 
reality of Central Harlem is quite different from 
the ideological image, and yet the image is a 
trenchant one and will remain so for years to 
come. It is probably the most immediate barrier 
to white in-migration. 
It is difficult to assess how much this negative 
image will ultimately preclude white gentrifica- 
tion in the area. The experience of Capitol Hill 
in Washington, D.C. and a number of other 
neighborhoods suggests that white gentrification 
of nonwhite neighborhoods can occur. But Har- 
lem is much larger symbolically as well as physi- 
cally and thereby perceived as more threatening 
yet more intriguing by the white middle class. 
Building Size and Zoning Limitations 
While the immediate target of rehabilitation 
efforts is the area's townhouses, the gentrifica- tion of Central Harlem as a whole will depend 
ultimately on whether or not the large stock of 
tenements and vacant lots can be rehabilitated 
and redeveloped. Without extensive public sub- 
sidies, Central Harlem's tenements will have to 
be rehabilitated by private developers, probably 
as condominiums and co-ops, given the current 
unattractiveness of rental housing in New York 
City. To date, this kind of rehabilitation and 
conversion has occurred in only one or two iso- 
lated cases, and it is unclear whether private 
developers will find rehabilitating Central Har- 
lem's relatively small tenements economically 
attractive. 
Almost all the community's residential lots 
are currently zoned for relatively low-density 
development, which effectively limits new con- 
struction to about six stories. Although private 
developers currently prefer to build large apart- 
ment houses in order to maximize their returns, 
Central Harlem's relatively low land prices 
might enable them to construct townhouses and 
low-scale apartment buildings. Alternatively, a 
successful challenge might well be mounted 
against the zoning regulations in the name of a 
new Harlem Renaissance. 
The Supply of Private Mortgage Financing 
Recent mortgage data show the dearth of pri- 
vate institutional financing in the area. Of the 
$12 million invested in Central Harlem mort- 
gages in 1982 (nearly all of which was for large 
multifamily dwellings) HUD provided 47.5 per- 
cent for six separate buildings. Most of the 
remaining mortgage money (a further 34.5 per- 
cent) was purchase money mortgages, that is, 
seller-financed mortgages. There were more 
than 30 private institutional lenders, mostly 
small local lenders, but no one of them 
accounted for more than 2 percent of the total 
mortgage money. That is, no single private 
financial institution ventured as much as 
$240,000 in the entire area in 1982 (City of New 
York, Commission on Human Rights 1983). 
This finding heightens the possibility that 
where property transactions have been brisk, 
notably the western corridor, the sales were 
small in scale and often self-financed or seller 
financed. Without substantially increased pri- 
vate financing, large-scale rehabilitation and 
redevelopment will not take place. This is 
clearly perceived by all public and private insti- 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
360 Schaffer and Smith 
tutions involved in the redevelopment of the 
area. Thus the City's Redevelopment Strategy 
for Central Harlem, proposed in 1982, begins 
from the assumption that "with drastic reduc- 
tions in federal housing and economic aid" 
resulting from the Reagan cuts, the emphasis 
would have to shift toward private market 
investment and public-private partnerships: the 
"private sector . . . would have to play a pivotal 
role" (City of New York, Harlem Task Force 
1982, i-ii). It is difficult to predict the extent to 
which private financial investment will begin to 
flow into the Central Harlem housing market. 
For decades Harlem has been almost com- 
pletely redlined, and despite a secular increase 
in renovation activity at the national scale in the 
early 1980s, the Chemical Bank loan of $47 mil- 
lion represents the first significant influx of pri- 
vate capital into Central Harlem. The outcome 
of the Towers on the Park condominiums will be 
crucial. 
The constraints on gentrification in Central 
Harlem are, then, considerable, but not neces- 
sarily insurmountable. There are also strong 
forces pushing for the redevelopment and reha- 
bilitation of the neighborhood's housing stock. 
Prime among them are the obvious assets of 
Central Harlem's location and transportation 
access. As professional, managerial, and admin- 
istrative employment continues to expand in 
Manhattan, as the number of households 
increases, and as the housing market tightens, 
Harlem becomes an increasingly attractive can- 
didate for gentrification. But despite its substan- 
tially underpriced housing in relation to the rest 
of Manhattan and the economic opportunity this 
represents, there is no automatic transformation 
of Harlem into a gentrified "haven." In loca- 
tional and economic terms, there is no doubt 
that the potential for gentrification is there; the 
question is whether these economic and loca- 
tional forces are powerful enough to overcome 
the constraints. 
Perhaps the most important determinant of 
Central Harlem's future is the success or failure 
of the City's strategy for the area. The City is 
particularly important because it is the major 
landlord in the neighborhood. The conventional 
wisdom is that about 65 percent of the housing 
units in Central Harlem are City owned, but the 
actual breakdown of ownership is more complex 
(Table 2). The City owns just over 35 percent of 
the Central Harlem housing stock and another 
26.4 percent is either public housing or was con- Table 2. Ownership of Housing Units in Central Harlem, 1983 
Housing Ownership units % 
Public housing 8,144 14.6 City-owned housinga 19,588 35.2 Publicly assisted private housing Mitchell-Lama 2,520 4.5 Federal Title 1 3,528 6.4 Urban Development Corp. 501 0.9 Private 21,399 38.4 Total 55,680 100.0 
Source: City of New York, Department of City Planning (1983). a Buildings taken by city through in rem process. 
structed with public assistance. The City cur- 
rently anticipates taking over 5,000 additional 
private units in tax foreclosure proceedings, 
reducing the proportion of private units to below 
30 percent. Figure 5 gives a picture of the con- 
centration of City-owned housing in the area. 
As one aspect of their policy, the City auc- 
tioned 12 townhouses for rehabilitation in Feb- 
ruary 1982, and in August of that year, Mayor 
Koch released copies of a Redevelopment Strat- 
egy for Central Harlem, prepared by a special 
task force (City of New York, Harlem Task 
Force 1982). The report calls for a selective tar- 
geting of "stronger" anchor areas in Central 
Harlem in the attempt to induce a redevelop- 
ment that is "economically integrated" (p. 2). 
The City's target areas are shown in Figure 6. 
The strategy is to bolster the areas where the 
private market is becoming active (the western 
corridor, essentially) and to use anchor areas to 
the south (the Gateway) and the north (the 
stretch from Hamilton Heights to the compara- 
tively well off Strivers Row where disinvest- 
ment has been less marked and private lenders 
still operate) in order to encircle the heart of 
Harlem. As one participant put it, the plan is to 
"circle the wagons around" and move in from 
the outskirts (Donald Cogsville, pers. comm., 
April 20, 1984). 
By 1985, the City government had success- 
fully maneuvered through and around much 
local opposition (Daniels 1983a) and put 149 
additional townhouses up for auction; 1,257 bids 
were received, and the winners paid between 
$2,000 and $163,000 for the properties. The 
average was $50,000, and of the winners, 98 
went by prior agreement to residents of Commu- 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
/ \ m less than 25% 
. . . ..:. &E 25-50% 
\.... X 50% and over 
o 1km 
0 1/2mi 
Figure 5. Distribution of City-owned housing units as percentage of total housing units. / \\ - Phase I 
/ [ 1 adjacent areas 
LiIito Phase I 
Phase 11 
Economic Development 
-135TH ST- 
125TH ST \L \ :: 
_ _ _ _1km 
O 1/2mi 
Figure 6. City of New York Redevelopment Strategy Areas. 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
362 Schaffer and Smith 
nity Districts 9 and 10 in Harlem (C. Douglas 
1985). Perhaps most significant is that City offi- 
cials succeeded, with the help of a $6 million 
grant, in convincing the Freedom National Bank 
to provide purchase and renovation loans at the 
below-market interest rate of 7.5 percent. 
Together with the Chemical Bank deal, this 
agreement suggests that private capital is begin- 
ning to perceive Harlem as a viable and perhaps 
even lucrative investment especially when 
backed by public funds. 
Conclusion 
From our examination of data on social 
changes in Central Harlem up to 1980 and of 
transformations in the housing market through 
1984, we conclude that the initial stages of gen- 
trification can be observed in Central Harlem, 
especially in the western corridor. Compared 
with four years earlier when the most recent 
report on the question was issued (AKRF 1982, 
76, 87), there are certainly more substantial 
signs of incipient gentrification. But little 
momentum has yet been achieved. If these con- 
clusions are necessarily tentative, the study has 
the added value of providing an empirical base 
for evaluating the trends that will emerge in the 
late 1980s. 
In terms of the theoretical debates reviewed 
earlier, the results of this case study are also 
tentative. The fact that the process has begun at 
all, that gentrification is even on the agenda in 
Harlem, lends support to the claim that we are 
witnessing not a curious anomaly but a tren- 
chant restructuring of urban space. The Harlem 
experience accords with the view that the pro- 
cess involves "collective social actors." In this 
case, it is not private capital alone that has 
played the leading role. Not until 1985 did a 
large potential influx of private mortgage capital 
begin to materialize. The state, in a number of 
institutional guises, has been most heavily 
involved in facilitating an upward momentum in 
the housing market; the leadership role has been 
taken by the local state-the City of New York. 
The City proposes a redevelopment strategy 
that will benefit Central Harlem residents, avoid 
large-scale gentrification, and produce an "eco- 
nomically integrated" community. The City 
states explicitly that this "can be achieved with- 
out displacing the present residents of Harlem" 
(City of New York, Harlem Task Force 1982, 1,2). In one very real sense, this is more possible 
in Central Harlem than elsewhere. The City 
owns such a vast stock of abandoned buildings 
(many of them vacant) and undeveloped land 
that it is possible for substantial rehabilitation 
and redevelopment to occur before low-income 
residents are directly threatened with displace- 
ment. But for the City's privately based redevel- 
opment strategy to succeed, two prerequisites 
are crucial. First, Central Harlem will have to 
attract a large number of outside residents, most 
of whom may be black at first, but many of 
whom will necessarily be white as momentum 
builds. Second, the area will have to attract 
much larger quantities of private financing. 
Should these prerequisites be achieved, Central 
Harlem could be transformed from a depressed 
island of disinvestment into a "hot spot" of 
reinvestment, integrated into the Manhattan 
housing market. This would ultimately mean 
that large numbers of community residents 
would face displacement. Thus for Harlem as 
for many other areas that have undergone gen- 
trification, "economic integration" may be an 
impossible hope and "a little gentrification" 
may be too unstable a state to survive for long. 
The City redevelopment strategy admits as 
much: in Harlem, "economic integration" 
means bringing in rich people and "social bal- 
ance" means an influx of whites. 
Gentrification may only be one piece in a 
larger urban restructuring that will fundamen- 
tally alter the face of Harlem. The conclusions 
of our research make it difficult to disagree with 
Harold Rose's prognosis on the future of black 
working-class neighborhoods. "If the evolving 
spatial pattern of black residential development 
is not significantly altered," according to Rose 
(1982, 139), the next generation of "ghetto 
centers will essentially be confined to a selected 
set of suburban ring communities located in 
metropolitan areas where the central city black 
population already numbers more than one- 
quarter million." We might add the corollary 
that if the evolving spatial pattern of gentrifica- 
tion in the central city continues, then not only 
will the suburban ghettos burgeon, but the inner 
city ones will shrink at the hands of white 
middle-class migrants. 
We are not predicting that Central Harlem will 
inevitably become a white neighborhood. Apart 
from the City's policy toward the area, there are 
two other major determinants of Central Har- 
lem's future: the condition of the national and 
This content downloaded from 131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:50:32 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Gentrification of Harlem 363 
New York City housing markets and the effec- 
tiveness of political opposition. If the housing 
market remains strong and opposition is weak, 
then gentrification has a better chance of build- 
ing momentum. If as part of a larger economic 
recession the housing market also declines or if 
opposition to the threat of a gentrified Harlem is 
sufficiently great, then the process may be 
halted. Another important question concerns 
the cultural revival that Harlem is currently 
experiencing, with the reopening of the Apollo 
Theater, the announcement of a new Multi- 
Media Arts Center on the site of the Renais- 
sance Ballroom ("$14.5 million arts project 
. ." 1984), and the "discovery" by the white 
middle class of several of Harlem's restaurants 
and clubs. Bus tours around Harlem have 
already attracted thousands of tourists. Ironic as 
it sounds, this emerging "New Harlem Renais- 
sance" may unwittingly ease the gentrification 
process as significant numbers of whites visit 
and begin to feel comfortable in Harlem. Thus, 
according to The Harlem Entrepreneur Portfo- 
lio, which promotes itself as "Harlem's newest 
brownstone newsletter," "The joys of living in 
Harlem are endless. The main one being a sense 
of community" ("Profiles in brownstone living" 
1985).
It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that for 
Central Harlem residents, gentrification is a 
"Catch 22." Without private rehabilitation and 
redevelopment, the neighborhood's housing 
stock will remain severely dilapidated; with it, a 
large number of Central Harlem residents will 
ultimately be displaced and will not benefit from 
the better and more expensive housing. They 
will be victims rather than beneficiaries of gen- 
trification. At present, there are no plans for this 
contingency, either in the City's Redevelopment 
Strategy or elsewhere; none of the development 
strategies for Central Harlem even admit the 
likelihood of displacement. As Harold Rose 
(1982, 148) so perceptively puts it in the broader 
context: "Needless to say, there appears to be 
little concern regarding the social and economic 
implications associated with the present spatial 
reorganization upon the future of urban blacks, 
or for that matter upon the future of the city." 
Rose might easily have been generalizing 
from the Harlem experience and the reaction of 
political and planning officials to the effect of 
gentrification on the working class. For not only 
is the potential problem ignored or simply 
denied; gentrification has even been construed as the solution to the housing problems faced by 
Harlem residents. At the ground breaking for 
the Towers on the Park condominiums, U.S. 
Senator Alfonse D'Amato was confronted by 
organized community protestors chanting oppo- 
sition to the gentrification of Harlem. Calling the 
condominium project "beautiful," and "New 
York at its best," D'Amato glared at the protes- 
tors and, as The New York Times described the 
scene, then declared, " 'I'd like to sing too,' 
and broke into a brief, off-key aria: 'Gen-tri-fi- 
ca-tion. Hous-ing for work-ing people. 
A-men.' " ("Disharmony and housing" 1985). 
Acknowledgments 
For valuable assistance in the preparation and research for this paper we want to thank Alex Schwartz, Andrea Katz, Barri Brown, and Diana Elrod. Jan van Weesup, Bob Beauregard, Roman Cybriwsky, and the Annals reviewers gave valuable comments on earlier drafts, and George Colbert drew the final versions of the figures. 
Notes
1. By townhouses, we mean three- to five-story resi- dential structures with brick or brownstone fronts. This includes many brownstones, but in Harlem "brownstone" is a misleading label for these structures as many do not have brownstone fronts. 2. Chall makes much of aggregate citywide data that do not show any absolute reversal of suburban- ization trends (at least up to 1980), and so down- plays the extent of gentrification. In fact, if one examines per capita income changes, rather than household income, and if one is prepared to examine spatially contiguous groups of census tracts and their internal changes, a much clearer picture of gentrification emerges. The most signif- icant aspect of the 1980 census in this respect is precisely that gentrification shows up at the census-tract level for the first time. This is imme- diately evident by mapping per capita income and median contract rent increases for Manhattan, where the southern and western part of the island show dramatic rises. The findings demonstrate the substantial spread and expansion of the pro- cess since 1970. See also Marcuse (1986). 
