City
Analysis of Urban Change, Theory, Action
ISSN: 1360-4813 (Print) 1470-3629 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ccit20
Gentriﬁcation in the global South
Ernesto López-Morales
To cite this article: Ernesto López-Morales (2015) Gentriﬁcation in the global South, City, 19:4,
564-573, DOI: 10.1080/13604813.2015.1051746
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13604813.2015.1051746
Published online: 30 Jul 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 9017
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 43 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ccit20
Gentriﬁcation in the global
South
Ernesto Lo ´pez-Morales
Introduction
The increasingly influential post-colo-
nial approach to comparative urban
studies helps us see with great detail
the richness of an ample array of diverse
urban regimes in the world. There are so
many different politico-economic contexts
and cultural attitudes to urban life in every
corner of the (rapidly urbanizing) world
that deserve careful scrutiny without necess-arily drawing on imported theoretical pre-
conceptions. In this vein, authors like
Robinson ( 2011) have been paramount in
rejecting centralized urban theorizations and
instead advocate for emergent and simul-
taneous theory construction, from differentplaces at different times, thus making theori-
zation more agile and flexible than before.
Post-colonial comparativist scholars (amongothers, see McFarlane 2010; Roy 2009) aim
to constitute a collegial production of knowl-edge without the act of theory travelling,because the latter is, they say, a major impo-
sition of knowledge, a colonial exertion of
intellectual power that has to be detachedfrom current urban studies. Some of them,
like Robinson, even advocate for an extensive
‘unlearning’ of what we have learnt so farabout cities, namely, dismissing ideas we
have already acquired from Western aca-
demic environments. According to some ofthese current urban post-colonial thinkers,
gentrification in particular falls into this cat-
egory of pre-established, Westernizedthoughts and preconceptions.
Post-colonial scholars envision a theory-
making which would allow every case in theworld the benefit of a particularized and
highly contextualized theorization, a goal Isupport and work towards. However, Ithink that calling to ‘unlearn’ what we
already know—for instance, the expansionof urban capitalism and its many injus-
tices—may also unnecessarily eliminate
some of the most critical perspectives, discus-sions and narratives that a number of aca-
demics (and local activists) have tried to
articulate and that currently help us confront
the injustices of capitalism through relatively
shared spaces of debate. We do need somegeneric theoretical categories (regardless of
the geographical location where they were
first formulated) to bring urban debateswithin certain useful parameters, a process
far more nurturing than bringing together
relatively detached observations of processesfrom everywhere and keeping them isolated
in different regional threads because the con-
texts where they happen to occur seem to usgeographically or historically dissimilar.
Gentrification as a concept has come to
epitomize this debate. While I concur withGhertner ( 2014) that we need to look
beyond purely economic forces when wedeal with the inequalities of urban redevelop-ment, gentrification is also a far richer narra-
tive than simple discussion around conflict
over private ownership of land and land-value curves. In most cases gentrification is
precisely something very different, namely,
the superimposition by the dominant strataof market rules in spaces where other,
alternative social structures pre-exist them
(e.g. informal regimes of landed property inBrazilian favelas ) and usually it is the state
that displaces low-income people fromcertain (now) strategic places for metropoli-tan restructuring agendas which are different
to the simple pursuance of higher and better
#2015 Taylor & FrancisCITY, 2015
VOL. 19, N O. 4, 564–573, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13604813.2015.1051746

use. Gentrification is, therefore, more than a
class-imposed dispossession of land value. It
is instead the loss of the use value of land,environmental key resources, and access to
mobility and public services experienced by
the poor who inhabit urban places nowdeemed desirable for political and economic
goals.
Gentrification theory helps us to develop
class-relational perspectives on urbanchange specifically focused on the use value
of land for the sake of its extremely polarizedclass absorption of the exchange value. It does
not tame understandings of processes of
accumulation by dispossession (Ghertner2014) and the emergence of alternative
agendas for a right to the city. Gentrificationin many places of the global South isa form of
accumulation by dispossession. In fact, gen-
trification provides a useful relational lens
where the injustices of capital-driven redeve-lopment can be seen in its actual polarized
nature. When Ghertner criticizes the diffu-
sionist logic (namely, to reject the North-to-South trajectory) of the concept, he falls
into the same diffusionist logic as he seems
to understand gentrification as attached to aparticular post-industrial global North—a
static definition of a process that either can
or cannot be applied in other areas of theglobal South. Like Maloutas ( 2012), this
somewhat rigid interpretation of theconcept fails to see gentrification as a vividand mutating process and set of accompany-
ing theorizations.
For all of its foibles and complexities, gen-
trification remains a useful if generic concep-tual category in the global South. As I have
argued in comparative analyses recently con-ducted with a team of scholars (Lees, Shin,
and Lo ´pez-Morales 2016, forthcoming), we
must reject the diffusionist logic that takes
gentrification either as a certain neo-liberal
policy implemented in many cities or as a
Western-imposed ideology that ‘travels’. Ialso reject uncritically taking for granted
certain ‘particularities’ of gentrification
inherited from the global North as if theywere the only possible definition forgentrification—the supposed agency of the
middle-class consumer, the post-industrial
character of gentrification, the fetishizationof a certain mid-size neighbourhood as a
scale of analysis or the idea that gentrification
has to move through certain ‘waves’, as ifthere were preconditions for gentrification
to occur. In the global South we need to get
rid of many of those epistemological ‘inheri-tances’ to really look into the violent capital-
ist processes of urban reshaping occurring at
the planetary level, to see how gentrificationis a useful tool for understanding urban
change as a process of growing socio-spatial
inequality, and to be sensitive to the everydayconstruction of social polarization within
redeveloping areas in an ample array of
cities of the world.
Gentrification instead can be seen as the
different corollaries of an ample array oflocal factors like pre-existing social polariz-ation and state policies of spatial economic
restructuring. Gentrification is far from
being an economic force only, as some com-mentators argue wrongly. Gentrification is a
fundamentally political conflict. It is one of
the most significant and socially unjust pro-cesses affecting cities today, and gentrifica-
tion theory is useful for it propels us to
discuss and confront evidence of the pro-cesses of rampant neo-liberalization every-
where. Gentrification is not just about rent
gaps increasing, signalling where urban rede-velopment intensifies for the benefit of the
few, the more affluent segments of society
who pursue a higher and better use. It isabout the loss of use value in space as well
as the denegation of the right to use certain
land for social reproduction for the many atthe bottom of society as soon as the exchange
value of that land increases to the point that
any other value consideration becomes irrele-vant for those who make unilateral decisions
about urban redevelopment.
These arguments can be seen clearly in
narratives ranging from Santiago(Lo ´ pez-Morales 2011,2013a ,b) to Rio de
Janeiro (Cummings 2015); some analyses
focus on the necessary and fruitfulL
O´PEZ-MORALES :GENTRIFICATION IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH 565
application of rent gap theory at the ‘plane-
tary’ level (Slater, forthcoming ); others do
not. But all reflect on the violent roles of
the state (that heavily draw on mega-scale
infrastructural transformation) and the
flows and mutations of (trans)national finan-cialized capitalism, insisting that these factors
need to be understood from the points of
view of those most impacted by redevelop-ment and most likely to be displaced.
Urban theories exist to be used, to interpret
certain realities and to empower people whofight for their rights as urban citizens. Rent
gap issues are core in Chile, core in China,
South Korea, Mexico and other countriesacross the South (Lees, Shin, and Lo ´pez-
Morales, 2016, forthcoming). The analysis
of a class-led dispute of ground rent also
helps improve the sensitivity of measure-
ments quantifying gentrification-led displa-
cement (Lo ´pez-Morales 2013a ,b; Shin
2009), as an extremely polarized private
capture of ground rent does not allow mostoriginal residents to afford replacementaccommodation after redevelopment. This
approach unveils conflicts associated not
only with rent gap or land-value curves butalso with the use value of land and the possi-
bilities that central or well-localized land
provides its occupants. It also reveals sharedissues of praxis that anti-displacement acti-
vists can learn from and apply in their
struggle. Sometime ago the rent gap theorywas depicted as overly deterministic
(Hamnett 1991), but critics never understood
the real power this theory has had to address
the essentially neo-liberal inequalities
between economic forces and social agents
in many rapidly transforming cities.
Yes, gentrification has gone ‘planetary’
The question about the usefulness of the gen-
trification concept outside the global North isnot new. The term ‘gentrification’ has been
conceptually stretched for more than two
decades to adopt a similar trajectory aroundthe world (see Hackworth and Smith 2001;Jones and Varley 1999; Smith 2002). Critical
authors claim gentrification is a Westernideology of urbanism imposed on the South,where more indigenous concepts are actually
more useful around issues of informality or
neighbourhood change (see Betancur 2014;
Hamnett 1991; Maloutas 2012). But currently
we see a number of cases where gentrificationhas gone ‘planetary’ if seen generically (Lees,Shin, and Lo ´ pez-Morales 2016, forthcoming).
The term ‘planetary’ (rather than the term‘global’ which is so politically contaminated)is useful to analyse all-encompassing class-led
conflict for spatial redevelopment—but not
in the ‘diffusionist’ North-to-South logicsof gentrification ‘waves’ that Hackworth
and Smith ( 2001) once saw, in my opinion,
based on too little empirical evidence, nor in
the way that Atkinson and Bridge ( 2005) pro-
claimed gentrification as a sort of ‘force’ thattravelled outwards from a certain ‘centre’towards global peripheries, nor the idea that
gentrification is not indigenous to currently
‘emerging’ contexts and that it is new tothem as it has originated from the West.
We need to see the shared capitalist struc-
tures of gentrification vis-a `-vis the sociologi-cal, cultural and institutional contextual
particularities the phenomenon acquires in
each place, and this discussion needs to benurtured by lucid critical discussions from
cities beyond the still usual cases of London,
New York and so on. We need to go
beyond the mental constraints that have
been erected after decades of analysing andreading the same case studies. We need tothink on what Clark ( 2015) calls the
‘generic’ nature of gentrification, a radicaltheory that is provocative, useful and pro-ductive to keep theorizing comparatively
about both the structures and the agents
that generate urban social polarization. It is
one
thing to criticize the diffusionist trajec-
tory, but another to reject the wholeconcept of gentrification as problematic at aplanetary level simply because the cases of
class-polarizing redevelopment seen in the
world do not resemble traditional descrip-tions of gentrification first seen in the global566 C
ITYVOL. 19, N O.4
North in the 1960s. This is a mistake many
scholars fall into, one which dangerously
leads us towards a collection of dispersedreflections rather than a vibrant community
of thought and a process of comparative
learning.
This is a mistake many fellow scholars
from the global South also fall into whenthey take their study cases as unique and seethe pre-existing theoretical narratives
evident in their cases as immovable. Current
fieldwork in Mexico City has turned upnearly 60 current cases of land disputes in
that city alone. While a well-established aca-
demia refuses to accept the usefulness of gen-trification theory’s class-relational
perspective to understand this ongoing and
rapidly mutating phenomenon, Mexicangrass-roots activists very much embrace, dis-
seminate, distort, adapt and mutate the root
concept of gentrification not only to under-stand but also to make others understand
how and why capitalist forces are aiming to
transform their colonias and homogenize
their assorted schemes of land tenure and
brown-skinned social composition into one
intensive, rapid, profit-seeking, upper-income oriented, whitening redevelopment.
Sergio Gonza ´lez, an important activist in
colonia Jua ´rez, calls gentrification in Mexico
a process of ‘whitening’ ( blanqueamiento )
to incorporate three linked phenomena—thearrival of affluent white middle classes bothculturally and physically displacing low-
income mestizo communities, the actual
whitening of buildings imposed by the new
‘middle-class’ aesthetic taste and the money
laundering which real estate investment
enables, a vastly understudied characteristicof Mexican, Latin American and US real
estate development. He very much grasps
the dialectical political usefulness of gentrifi-cation theory to explain the many conflicts in
the neighbourhood where he lives, and
doesn’t shy away from repurposing theconcept to understand his colonia’s
transformation.
In this way, gentrification in the South dia-
logues with pre-existing narratives, many ofwhich have been nurtured by equally ‘plane-
tary’ debates in the past. Roy ( 2009, 820) has
put this argument in poetic terms: we need to
go against the post-colonial temptation to
‘police the borders across which ideas, pol-
icies, and practices flow and mutate’. Herpoint of view gives meaning to those
seeking theoretical understanding of similar
processes or trajectories, especially given theincreasing number of cases and scholars
worldwide that do not fear using existing
concepts and transforming or adapting them.
Of course, gentrification as a generic cat-
egory presents interesting challenges to dialo-gue with previous ‘Southern’ theoreticalframeworks, for instance, the trajectory
from marginalization to economic inclusion
experienced by the moradores of many
favelas in Rio de Janeiro. However, the gen-
trification framework is one of the best
opportunities to retest politico-economic dis-cussions that have been held in the past.
Janoschka, Sequera, and Salinas ( 2014) per-
ceive a sort of Latin American style of gentri-
fication that links Mexico, Brazil, Chile and
Argentina due to shared colonial legacies
that have followed similar paths—thedeterioration of historical centres now
leading to their redevelopment via a ‘transfer’
of policies coming from international NGOs(non-governmental organizations) or donors,
based on a class-led symbolic appropriation
of that legacy. These are not cases of extendedlanded property (with the sole exception of
Chile that holds 70% of land ownership)
but cases where the many forms of land andhousing tenure (from very informal favela
land tenure schemes to the many inquilinos
or de facto tenants that inhabit Mexico
City’s centres) still do not seem to impede
the advancement and voraciousness of large
and medium-sized real estate firms and inves-tors. On the other hand, Latin Americans are
very concerned with the conditions of urban
citizenship, marginality and inequality inaccess to land and services, and also intrigued
by the possibilities that ‘insurgent citizen-
ship’ (Holston 2008; Roy 2009) can
empower a vibrant anti-gentrificationL
O´PEZ-MORALES :GENTRIFICATION IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH 567
activism in Latin America that is already
being nurtured by class-sensitive academic
research on urban change.
In Lees, Shin, and Lo ´pez-Morales ( 2016,
forthcoming) we have also argued that pro-cesses of gentrification in cities around theworld produce plural sites of capital accumu-
lation in historic urban, suburban and rural
territories. In fact, there is a current amplifi-cation of the terrains where state-led gentrifi-
cation is unfolding, and we know this due to
the increasing number of cases analysed. It isalso evident from Seoul (Shin and Kim 2015)
to Santiago (Lo ´pez-Morales 2013a )t o
Washington, DC (Mueller 2014) to London
(Lees 2014) to Mumbai (Doshi 2013), that
the redevelopment of low-income quartersin these cities is one of the most salient poli-tico-economic and sociological issues
related to housing in those cities. The
inequalities of gentrification are not some-thing that we scholars simply think about;
they are something local people and local
activists suffer through and know. The roleof the state in the production of increasing
urban segregation has been hitherto under-
conceptualized by academics, but we seeeverywhere today how governments in
Southern cities are ‘excited’ at the possibility
of accumulating capital while remakinghitherto unattended built environments with
displacement effects generated. Even more
critically, the specific theorization of theinequalities of land rent capture, in tandem
with understanding the loss of social cohe-
sion through the influx of capital intohitherto deprived environments, gives pre-
cision to existing economic theories without
generating conceptual confusion.
While previous land tenure regimes exist-
ing in (now) gentrifying spaces are important,their explanatory power is limited. Forinstance, gentrification helps understand the
fact that the idea of spatial fix as a ‘remedy’
for crises of over-accumulation is notenough explanation for regions like China
(Shin 2014) where over-accumulation in the
primary circuit of industrial production
goes hand in hand with the increasinginvestment in the secondary circuit of the
built environment. Both reinforce each
other’s advancement; the state monopoly offinancial instruments provides private stake-
holders with the power to obtain higher
profits.
1It is clear that the exertion of class
power in the remaking of cities in the South
takes different shapes, but this does not
mean this process is not gentrification. Slumpacification programmes and slum tourism
in Rio de Janeiro (Cummings 2015), the
removing of vendedores ambulantes from
central Mexico City (Delgadillo 2014) and
the sanitization of space in order to attract
tourists leading to ‘touristification’ (seeLees, Shin, and Lxpez-Morales 2015) are
complex and variegated examples of class-motivated symbolic and material appropria-tion of space. Not just examples of gentrifica-
tion, they are also aggressive forms of
exerting class control over spaces that havebeen inhabited and socially produced by the
poor over decades and even centuries.
Gentrification in Chile and Brazil
Santiago, the largest metropolitan area of
Chile, is an interesting example of how gen-
trification is currently closely correlatedwith the ways in which contemporary capit-
alism raises the status of speculation in real
estate, in so far as the state has activelyincreased the possibility of accumulating
capital through remaking cities and upgrad-
ing the class structure of its neighbourhoodsat the expense of displacing original residents
(Lo ´ pez-Morales 2013a ,2013b ). High-rise
residential redevelopment is the dominant
form of gentrification as a number of analyses
have substantiated (Contreras 2011; Inzulza-
Contardo 2012), probably as the most rapid
device for amplifying capital invested in thebuilt environment. Santiago’s central space
is both a commodity and a mechanism ofsecuritization of surplus value, currently
being transformed, destroyed, densified and
also expanded as new periods of accumu-lation have unfolded in the country (e.g. the568 C
ITYVOL. 19, N O.4
scale of the gentrification process in Santiago
dramatically increased after the 1998 Asian
crisis, see Lo ´ pez-Morales 2010,2011).
The nature and tremendous power of
potential ground rents to attract capital andpolitical force together is only very recentlybeing discussed in enough detail in global
academic circles, but it is something that has
been vividly happening in Chile for a longtime. If Smith ( 1979) and Clark ( 1987) saw
the concerted devaluation of properties as away of enlarging the rent gap, more recentlyin Chile national-level state policies have
pushed the rent gap from the other direction,
increasing the potential ground rent throughthe amplification of floor area ratios, the
capacity to build a total floor area derived
from the size of the land upon which thebuilding is built (Lo ´ pez-Morales, Gasic and
Meza 2012). Due to relaxed building regu-
lations, rent-originated profits can only be
maximized by demolishing existing housing
and acquiring vast numbers and extensions
of land plots for redevelopment, somethingthat can be done exclusively by large-scale
real estate firms.
Under this model, owner-residents sell
their land and use the cash to find similarreplacement accommodation. However,
when original owner-residents come to selltheir land to real estate redevelopers, it
often happens that the price does not come
from competitive bidding but a sort of mono-psony (where one buyer is faced with several
sellers) that reduces the cash value for their
land and limits their post-occupancyoptions. The whole power structure of the
real estate sector in inner-city areas relies on
this inequality, as the system depends onthe domination of larger conglomerates pos-
sessing the highest technological and financial
capacities for construction. Only a few firmsdominate the market (in the central borough
of Santiago, 50% of the supply is produced
by four large-scale conglomerates).
Low-income petty landowners lack bar-
gaining power and usually have limited edu-cation and less access to legal advice. On theother hand, developers acquire land plots inadvance in order to block the entry of other
competitors, and therefore can exert extra
pressure on the remaining landowners in thesame block. In the poorest, most derelict
inner quarters of Santiago, where original
resident households range from middle tolower income, or where there is a consider-
able presence of extremely low-income and
immigrant tenants in the existing, still non-gentrified residences, redevelopment looks
much harsher through the eyes of local
people than in the cold quantifications ofofficial redevelopment data.
In contemporary Chile, the commodifica-
tion and privatization of the land expels animportant segment of the original residents
for economic reasons from inner-city areas.
A whole sociological restructuring is under-way in Santiago, but those who dominate
this system are not a certain fraction of the
middle class, they are not simply ‘entrepre-neurs’ or investors, they are powerful large-
scale investors and speculators with enor-
mous power to buy, accumulate and re-sellland and increasingly expensive properties.
Santiago shows that, structurally speaking,
gentrification there is very much dependenton state policies. It also shows the contem-
porary forms of public and private sector
involvement in inner-city redevelopmentand the multisided and usually intertwined
roles of the state and assorted holders of
economic capital in the production, distri-bution and representation of urban exclusion
and segregation. This includes the stigmatiza-
tion of entire urban places, as anyone canconfirm after analysing the real estate propa-
ganda. The powerful real estate and finance
sector permeates national and local-levelstates and advocates a series of entrepreneur-
ial policy prescriptions and implementations.
The gentrifying market created by theChilean state and invigorated through its
policies is pure rent gap accumulation;
only very recently has the state undertakenmeasures to implement land-value capture
policies given the extremely high return
this kind of real estate business creates(Smolka 2013).L
O´PEZ-MORALES :GENTRIFICATION IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH 569
The case of Chile shows that ‘land-value
curves’ are useful but ultimately insufficient
explanations for gentrification. If gentrifica-tion theory has something important to con-
tribute to urban studies, it is precisely its
class-relational perspective on urban change,and the capacity it gives to urbanists to simul-
taneously see the two (or more than two)
sides in conflict (those holding capital andthose holding land) when urban change is
monopolized for certain class-motivated
goals. Gentrification is a political phenom-enon, and obviously not an economic struc-
turalism or a property-centric idea.
The wholesale transformation of Rio de
Janeiro since the early 1990s is another goodexample of even more aggressive state entre-
preneurialism and gentrification in areaswhere land tenure is not property ownership
by legal contract. Rio’s transformation is
based on a massive housing entitlement vis-a `-vis the social domestication of favelas, but
these policies have now broken down existing
social structures which served as support forsocial reproduction and helped the relation-
ship between the poor and the rest of the
urban society (Queiroz Ribeiro and dosSantos Junior 2007). Currently, class occu-
pation in areas where original land ownershiphas been informal and with historically pre-carious labour relations, is underpinned by
the state to penetrate and somehow tame
the spatiality of urban poverty. The wholecity interacts with a series of globalizing
mega-events, strategic military occupation
of favelas by the police and implementationof urban development projects run by the
state. The epitome of the latter is the vast
Zona Portua ´ria, experiencing a massivestate-financed ‘renaissance’ and mostly
private profits. Meanwhile, Police Pacifica-
tion Units are installed permanently in somefavelas to combat drug traffic networks and
strengthen security in a form that expands
the interest of the local and global elite inoccupying places where transportation facili-
ties such as lifts or cables have been built,
with new housing and social services asspaces open within some of the mostestablished favelas. This infrastructure-
oriented state approach to redevelopment is
revealing in the huge differences betweenthose who enter and those who leave those
areas, not only for their unequal economic
power to purchase, assemble and/or speculatewith land and properties, but also, crucially,
because of their highly polarized class-differ-
entiated material and immaterial accumu-lation of access to a wider range of cultural
and economic means of travelling across the
city.
These cases from Chile and Brazil are but
two of many whereby new ‘urban frontiers’are produced and new centralities emerge atpoints where transport access and the cre-
ation of ‘spatial capital’ (Blanco, Bosoer,
and Apaolaza 2014) arise as leading variables
in attracting capital (re)investment but also
producing contestation between existing
inhabitants and gentrifying forces, particu-larly when the reinvestment cycle kicks in.
The launch in 2010 of the Morar Carioca pro-
gramme (whose budget that year amountedto $3.9 billion dollars) aims to re-urbanize,
re-locate or deal with the approximately
1000 slums of Rio de Janeiro, while theMinha Casa Minha Vida programme has
also played a key role in the displacement of
some residents. At the symbolic level, the‘favela chic’ phenomenon has also raised the
‘favela culture’ into global circuits of cultural
and property consumption, through theirassociations with film, samba and carioca
funk (Cummings 2015). Another relevant
issue that the gentrification of Rio deJaneiro highlights is the way informality,
especially in housing and land tenure, can
be an accelerator for further land speculation,to the extent that housing policies seem to
generate a displacement disguised as a forma-
lization of housing and relocation elsewhere.In fact, as Ley and Teo ( 2014) point out, in
the global South demolition and eviction arenaturalized as an inevitable outcome of mod-ernization, but in fact this may show the
strong relation between informal land/prop-
erty tenure and accelerating speculative pro-cesses promoted both from the outside570 C
ITYVOL. 19, N O.4
(state–private entrepreneurs) and inside
(indigenous–local entrepreneurs) of social
enclaves.
Conclusion
Tempting as it may be, we must avoid the
over-extended, too particularist post-colonialassumption that the so-called ‘global North’
urban theory should be automatically
regarded as useless in the global South. Ifsuch were the case, we wouldn’t have theori-
zation in the social sciences at all. This is a
position that does not help theory to evolve,and has the opposite of the intended effect,
confining theory into certain world zones
instead. Southern researchers need the fullfreedom of their imagination, even if it
includes finding utility in old ideas from the
North.
Rent gap theory, at the heart of my use of
gentrification as an idea, was first applied inthe global North in the 1980s but now helpsexplain numerous different situations. This
includes the reality that an important
number of owner-residents, tenants andinformal (but customary) occupants will not
receive enough compensation, thus will not
be able to afford decent relocation amidstredevelopment processes even whilst they
are compelled by the state, market forces or
both, to sell their land (or cede their land-use rights) cheaply to more powerful econ-
omic agents. It points to why the state
needs to be accepted, recognized andstudied as the principal agent creating gentri-
fication in the current world. This applies not
just to the global South but also North (see,e.g. London Tenants Federation et al. 2014).
If we are to be trapped in restrictive defi-nitions of gentrification, neither the Chileanor Brazilian cases, nor current London
state-led gentrification would fit that defi-
nition. Neither would they be explainedthrough strict applications of the original ver-
sions of rent gap theory. Yet a theorization
sensitive enough to recognize that gentrifica-tion also means urban inequalities andsegregation accentuated by the state respond-
ing to large-scale private interests, can
provide useful intellectual and political toolsfor understanding the current world and
local environments in processes of change.
This is something that the many activists Iwork with and interact with in my research
understand very well.
Surely many of the cases discussed are also
forms of ‘accumulation by dispossession’,with ground rent in Santiago as the key
prize (Lo ´pez-Morales 2011); this is some-
thing Ghertner ( 2014) also saw in India. But
even so, a process of accumulation by dispos-session operates in space through the com-modification and privatization of land, and
also the forced expulsion of residents for
economic reasons. The state is the main stake-holder, not just allowing but actually stimu-
lating the process, and there is still much to
research and understand about these pro-cesses. I believe that both a useful and
generic gentrification theory and a rent gap
theory have much to offer given the increas-ingly ferocious land and housing markets
evident in many developing economies of
the global South. Public policies in theSouth are even more important causal
factors of gentrification than they have been
in the global North, and there is still toolittle understanding of the public investments
and changes at the macro scale that are
increasing elite access into certain neighbour-hoods around the world. Much more research
on gentrification is needed at a planetary
level. As Robinson ( 2011, 17) recalls:
‘the most abstract concepts offer an
opportunity to incorporate the widest range ofcities within comparative reflection. Abstractconcepts are also the level at which urbantheory is most open to a creative generation ofconcepts that might help us look differently atcities and their problems [ ...] urban studies
could find in the empirical, comparativeinterrogation of its most abstract concepts arich field for creative reconceptualization.’
Gentrification theory gives us enormous
opportunities to reflect on the specificitiesLO´PEZ-MORALES :GENTRIFICATION IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH 571
of the inequalities of urban redevelopment to
be able to compare, discuss, distort, trans-
form and struggle against what we knowabout urban capitalism in cities of the world.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the
author.
Note
1 This evidence also contradicts the supposed post-
industrial character of gentriﬁcation as such.
