Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bangladesh  (Hum.), Vol. 66(1), 2021, pp. 61-81  
  
 
 
UNFOLDING GENTRIFICATION IN DHAKA CITY 
 
Tamanna Rashid* 
 
Abstract 
Gentrification is a widely experienced phenomenon in the realm of urban 
development in all global cities. This has led many academics to scrutinise how 
gentrification is contextualised with distinctive socio-economic changes in cities 
beyond the geography of Europe and North America. This paper investigates the 
general gentrification process in Dhaka from the theoretical stance of Smith, Ley, 
Zukin, Hackworth and Davidson. Based on a qualitative research method, this 
study investigates two areas of Dhaka city as case studies. The study reveals 
mounting evidence of the recent development of run-down areas as an indication 
of new-build gentrification. Whereas, in the global context, the process of 
gentrification in developed cities is significantly influenced by the state policies in 
tandem with the private impetuous; in Dhaka, the overall role of the government in 
orchestrating the system seems to be bleaker. Similar to the experience of many 
global cities, gentrification in Dhaka with some distinctive localised features is 
also linked to the displacement of lower-income people from their original places; 
and this fact need to be taken into account in order to develop a more inclusive 
approach to city development.    
Introduction 
Gentrification has become a buzzword in recent years in the discourse of city 
development as well as in the spheres of government bodies, policymakers, civil 
society, and academia.1 Over the past five decades, urban researchers and planners 
have vigorously studied the backdrop context of the gentrification process and 
produced a large body of empirically subtle and theoretically nuanced findings 
worldwide.2 Initial researchers identified gentrification as intertwining with urban 
regeneration processes after a phase of urban decline in most of the North 
American and Western European central cities. In the mountain of literature, 
experts have studied gentrification’s role in restructuring the physical, economic, as 
                                                           
*      Lecturer (Part-Time), Department of Sociology, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman 
Science and Technology University, Gopalganj 
1  G. Ertelt et al., ‘The State-Made Rental Gap: Gentrification in Subsidized Rental 
Housing’, in I. Helbrecht (ed.),  Gentrification and Resistance: Researching Displacement 
Processes and Adaption Strategies , Springer Vs, Germany, 2018, p. 91.        
2  I. Helbrecht, ‘Gentrification and Displacement’, in I. Helbrecht (ed.), Gentrification and 
Resistance: Researching Displacement Process and Adaptation Strategies , Springer 
VS, Germany, 2018, p.1. 
62  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 well as social characteristics of the central city areas.3 Gentrification research, 
however, has experienced variegated shifts of concern. Contemporary thinkers are 
eager to investigate how gentrification communicates with other urban processes 
instead of simply locating specific forms of gentrification.4  
Studies in the global North have stretched far away from its preliminary concerns. 
In Asia, however, only a handful of researchers are engaged in the field, with their 
focuses still largely being confined to identifying the forms of gentrification with 
special reference to experiences of urban development.5 Nevertheless, this vivid 
global trend of urban regeneration has echoed elsewhere and is hardly unique to 
Dhaka, one of the fastest-growing megacities in the world.6 Dhaka city has also 
experienced numerous initiatives and comprehensive planning for effective urban 
growth since the second half of the twentieth century.7 Although several plans for a 
planned urban growth have always been formulated, none of them has gained any 
glimmer of hope. Moreover, despite being a centre for administrative and 
commercial activities of the region for about four hundred and ten years, the city 
entirely lacked any successful planning effort throughout its transformation period 
of the morphological structure, from purely rural to a megacity.8 
                                                           
3   G. Visser and N. Kotze, ‘The State and New-Build Gentrification in Central Cape 
Town, South Africa’, Urban Studies , Vol. 45, No.12, 2008, p. 2566, Available at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228337715_The_State_and_New-
build_Gentrification_in_Central_Cape_Town_South_Africa, (Accessed on 26 April 
2021).   
4      H. B. Shin, L. Lees, and E. Lopez-Morales, 'Introduction: Locating Gentrification in the 
Global East', Urban Studies , Vol. 53, No. 3, 2016, pp. 455-470, Available at 
http://repositorio.uchile.cl/bitstream/handle/2250/139406/Introduction-Locating-
gentrification-in-the-Global-East%201.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y, (Accessed on 18 
March 2021). 
5    R. Moore, ‘Understanding Gentrification in Southeast and East Asia’, Interdisciplinary 
Studies Journal , vol. 13 2013, pp. 116-130, Available at https://www.researchgate.net/ 
publication/346831776_Understanding_'Gentrification'_in_Southeast_and_East_Asia, 
(Accessed on 25 April 2021). 
6   L. Lata, P. Walters, and S. Roitman, ‘A marriage of convenience: Street vendor's 
everyday accommodation of power in Dhaka, Bangladesh’,  Cities, vol. 84, 2018, p.2, 
Available at https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S02642751173 
14439? via%3Dihub.  
7   A. Kabir and B. Parolin, Planning and Development of Dhaka- A Story of 400 Years, 
Proceedings of the 15th International Planning History Society Conference , Brazil, July 
2012, p.11, Available at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/ 324746990_ 
PLANNING_ AND_DEVELOPMENT_OF_DHAKA-A_STORY_OF_400_YEARS, (Accessed 
on 25 April 2021).  
8   N. Islam, Dhaka from City to Megacity: Perspectives on People, Places, Planning and 
Development Issues . Dhaka: Urban Studies Programme, Dept. of Geography, 
University of Dhaka, 1996, p.255. 
Unfolding Gentrification   63 
 The absence of any effective urban planning, however, could not restrain the path 
of urban growth of the city. Rather, the city is now experiencing an unprecedented 
growth of urbanisation than ever before. In a study, it is found that Dhaka is over 
90 per cent urban.9 The landscape of Dhaka expanded northward to create a ‘new 
Dhaka’ mainly for higher class residents.10 Initially, all the highlands were 
occupied by an increased population; and gradually all the low-laying areas were 
elevated and brought into development schemes by private initiatives. After that, in 
all of the planning and projections for urban development, government bodies and 
urban planners never used the term ‘gentrification’ to describe the process of city 
development.11 Instead, in the Asian context,  and more specifically in the context 
of Dhaka, conversion of old buildings into new ones or using urban spaces, either 
for commercial or residential purposes, were pushed by concerned bodies under the 
rhetoric of ‘beautification’ or ‘urban renewal process.12 This is because using such 
expressions implies a more positive and value-neutral outlook ignoring its other 
sides.13 Gentrification has been a crucial reason for people’s displacement, 
attracting academic attention to the issue; yet there is paucity of knowledge that 
needs to be addressed. Even studies on ‘classical’ interpretation of gentrification 
have been largely absent until recently.  
Against this backdrop, and drawing inspiration from the urge of recent thinkers to 
investigate gentrification from the political-economic context,14 this study seeks to 
                                                           
9  N. Islam, ‘Bangladesh’, in B.H. Roberts and T. Kanaley (ed.), Urbanization and 
Sustainability in Asia: Case Studies of Good Practice , Asian Development Bank, (May 
2006), pp. 43-68, Available at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273693983_ 
Urbanization_and_Sustainability_in_Asia_Good_Practice_Approaches_in_Urban_ 
Region_Development, (Accessed on 12 November 2020); A. Kabir and B. Parolin, 
Planning and Development of Dhaka- A Story of 400 Years,  Proceedings of the 
International Planning History Conference Brazil, July 2012, p.11. 
10    A. Kabir and B. Parolin, op. cit, p.11 
11    S. Huq and M. Alam, ‘Flood Management and Vulnerability of Dhaka’, in A. Kreimer, 
M. Arnold, and A. Carlin  (ed.) In Building Safer Cities: The Future of Disaster Risk, 
Washington: The World Bank, 2003, pp. 121-136 Available at https://www. 
preventionweb.net/files/638_8681.pdf, (Accessed on 15 March 2021); Cited from A. 
Kabir and B. Parolin, op. cit., p.12. 
12    S. He, 'New-Build gentrification in central Shanghai: Demographic changes and socio-
economic implications', Population, Space and Place , vol. 16, no. 5, 2010, pp. 345-361; 
R. Moore, ‘Understanding Gentrification in Southeast and East Asia’, Interdisciplinary 
Studies Journal, vol.13, 2013, p.121. 
13   L. Lees, T. Slater, and E. Wyly, ‘Gentrification Routledge’, New York , 2008; H. B. 
Shin, L. Lees, and E. Lopez-Morales, 'Introduction: Locating Gentrification in the 
Global East', Urban Studies, vol. 53, no. 3 , 2016, p.6. 
14    H. B. Shin, L. Lees, and E. Lopez-Morales, op. cit., pp. 1-16. 
64  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 assess the pace of Dhaka’s gentrification in comparison with the current trends in 
the gentrification process in the contemporary global North. It unfolds that Dhaka 
does not exhibit mimic Anglo-American gentrification processes. Instead, in most 
instances, it resembles the new-build gentrification experienced by many East 
Asian cities. This argument is supported by empirical data collected from field 
visits in two areas of Dhaka city: the Mohammadpur area, and the Mirpur area. The 
paper has three sections. Since this is an empirical research, the first section 
discusses the methodology of the study. The second section presents theoretical 
issues of gentrification; and in doing so, it draws on the experiences of 
gentrification in the cities of the global North. The third section analyses the 
findings of the empirical study, that is, gentrification in Dhaka city.15 
Methodology  
As stated earlier, this study unfolds the process of gentrification in Dhaka. The 
research was empirically conducted in two selected areas – Mirpur and 
Mohammadpur in Dhaka city – between 2016 and 2017. Both areas were selected 
based on their rapid spatial changes and infrastructural development for the last few 
decades. A large number of shopping malls, restaurants, boutique houses, parlours, 
gymnasiums, and other structural amenities have immensely changed the city 
landscapes. Besides, both areas have been turned into housing enclaves for 
emerging middle-class residents with the intervention of private and public 
developers. Therefore, the researcher selected these two areas as case studies for 
investigating the gentrification process. The study is based on the qualitative 
methodology in social research. It has collected data through, including in-depth 
interviews, key informant interviews (KIIS), and field observation. Following a 
theoretical sampling procedure, the researchers carried out qualitative interviews 
using a basic interview guide to the local people involved in various occupations 
like government officials, private officials, small and medium businessmen, shop 
owners, and house owners. All the respondents were residing or involved in the 
areas either for living or working purposes for about 15 to 40 years. To explore 
necessary changes related to the gentrification process, residents who were living in 
those areas for a long period were prioritised and selected purposively. In total, 14 
formal and 5 informal interviews were conducted. Furthermore, observations over 
six months (from April 2016 to October 2016) and taking field notes were firm 
techniques for collecting data to capture the whole picture of using urban spaces for 
                                                                                                                                       
15   J. Hackworth, Third Wave Gentrification, Ph D dissertation, Department of Geography, 
Rutgers University, 2000, p.22. 
 
 
Unfolding Gentrification   65 
 multiple purposes in the selected areas. All the interviews were either digitally 
recorded or written by the researcher on her own and then analyzed thematically 
according to the trends of the gentrification process with relevance to the global 
cities. Besides, the researcher attained enormous help from many secondary sources 
of data such as journal articles and books, as well as grey literature on the previous 
and the contemporary changes of the areas. These data were also arranged 
thematically, under the themes of neighbourhood type in the past, contemporary 
changes in the neighbourhood, reasons behind the changes, the role of the real 
estate sector, and displacement and eviction. The article now explores the 
gentrification process in Dhaka city. 
Contextualising Gentrification from Theoretical Perspectives 
Gentrification describes a process of transition of lower-class residential places or 
any vacant places into a new land of middle-class people for their residential and 
commercial uses.16 Similarly, Smith defines it as a way in which some intact or 
commercially unused urban neighbourhoods undergo a change of reinvestment in 
the built environment and rejuvenate for a group of new well-off middle and upper-
middle-class people.17 This process of physical and socio-cultural transformation of 
downtown neighborhoods into an enclave of urban middle-class people displaces 
lower class people and small entrepreneurs.18 Hence the process implies an increase 
in property value which is essentially economic by nature.19 As gentrification has 
become a controversial issue in this era of the neoliberal economy, scholarly works 
have addressed it from multiple dimensions. In addressing the ongoing changing 
urban structure in the second half of the twentieth century, two approaches received 
prominence. One is the production side explanation. It emphasises the role of class, 
capital, and changes in the material production of economic space in the city. The 
second one, the consumption approach, stresses culture, lifestyles, and patterns of 
consumption associated with the process.20 
                                                           
16    L. Lees, et al., op. cit. 
17  N. Smith, ‘Gentrification’, in W. V. Vliet (ed.), The Encyclopaedia of Housing , Sage, 
London: Thousand Oales CA. 1998, pp.198-199. 
18   R. Glass, ‘London: Aspects of Change’, in L. Lees, T. Slater, and E. Wyly (ed.), The 
Gentrification Reader, London and New York, Routledge, 2020, pp. 7-8.                
19   J. Hwang, ‘The Social Construction of a Gentrifying Neighbourhood: Reifying and 
Redefining Identity and Boundaries in Inequality’, Urban Affairs Review, vol.52, no.1, 
2015, pp.98-128.  
20  A. Cocola-Gant, ‘Gentrification and displacement: urban inequality in cities of late 
capitalism’, in T. Schwanen, and V. K. R. (Eds.), Handbook of Urban Geography, 
Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham and Northampton, 2019, pp.4-6. 
66  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 According to Ley, gentrification is a result of changing income and occupational 
structures of advanced capitalist society.21  Cities have shifted away from their 
previous role of manufacturing centres to a new hub of business and consumption 
services. The shift in question has produced a centre of diverse new professionals 
that emerged from a process of displacement of industrial working-class people 
from central city areas.22 Based on the consumption approach, Zukin similarly 
relates gentrification to the growth of the consumer-oriented service economy, 
resulting from the decline of the industrial production economy in developed 
cities.23 Conversely, according to the production side explanation24, gentrification 
needs to be understood within the context of the late twentieth century’s political 
economy.  Here the mobility of capital and investment, and the production and 
reproduction of urban spaces are more crucial than that of the production of tastes 
and demands of the middle-class people.  By analysing the suburbanisation process 
of America, Smith reveals that the renewal of American inner cities is associated 
with a movement of investment of economic capital in inner cities.25 
Given the contradictory positions of the consumption and the production side 
theories in explaining gentrification, 26 recent thinkers believe that neither of the 
theories can adequately describe the gentrification process.27 Therefore, a more 
intensive explanation of gentrification requires variegated historical and contextual 
analysis rather than examining it from the classical perspective or any particular 
geographical contingencies.28 In particular, in the context of non-Western countries, 
and more specifically in the Global East, gentrification needs to be understood 
through the lens of the political economy approach to urban development.29  
Socio-structural processes of gentrification 
The first phase of gentrification was marked by the post-war period and found in 
some cities like London and New York, initiated by some small-scale ‘gentrifiers’ 
                                                           
21  D, Ley. The New Middle Class and the Remaking of the Central City.  Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1996.  
22    Ibid. 
23  S. Zukin, Landscape of Power: From Detroit to Disney World, University of California 
Press, Berkeley, CA, 1991. 
24  N, Smith. Toward a Theory of Gentrification: A Back to the City Movement by Capital, 
not People. Journal of the American Planning Association,  vol. 45, no. 4, 1979, pp. 
538-548. 
25  A. Cocola-Gant, op. cit. p. 5. 
26  F. Tonkiss, Space, the city and social theory: social relations and urban forms, Polity 
Press, Oxford, 2005. 
27  E. Clark, ‘The Order and Simplicity of Gentrification- a Political Challenge’, in L. 
Lees, T. Slater, and E. Wyly, The Gentrification Reader, Routledge, London, and New 
York, 2005, pp. 256-264. 
28  H. B. Shin, L. Lees, and E. Lopez-Morales, op. cit, pp. 1-16. 
29  Ibid. 
Unfolding Gentrification   67 
 who organised to resettle downtown neighbourhood areas for their personal use.30 
These groups of people were attracted to disinvested inner-city neighbourhoods. 
The main reason for this was affordable housing. 31 While these were the initial 
instances of the localized nature of gentrification, public funding significantly 
induced the process.32 Although state intervention was appreciated with the 
narratives of renovating deteriorated urban physical structure, it eventually brought 
dreadful consequences, specifically for the urban working class.33    
The second wave’ gentrification started after the economic recession of 1973.  
During this period development firms and real estate played a powerful role in 
turning new neighbourhoods into gentrified neighbourhoods. Cities adopted new 
strategies in order to appeal to such kind of investment.34 Unlike the first wave, the 
state's role here was to spur on expanding the private market rather than directly 
coordinating the system.35 This wave too witnessed counteractive incidences 
against gentrification in many cities. This is because gentrification came out to be 
an obvious reason for homelessness, displacement, and increased vulnerabilities of 
the urban poor inhabitants.36 Furthermore, many thinkers outlined ‘deindustrialisation’ 
as an underlying socio-economic factor that fostered the process of gentrification in 
the second half of the twentieth century.37  
Deindustrialisation worsened the physical and social conditions in downtown 
neighbourhoods, resulting in increased unemployment, marginalisation, and 
deterioration of buildings. To address these post-industrial social and material 
problems, successive governments undertook many restoration programs such as 
                                                           
30  A. Cocola-Gant, op. cit. 
31   N. Smith, and P. Williams, 'Alternative to Orthodoxy: Invitation to a Debate' in N. 
Smith and P. Williams (ed.), Gentrification of the City,  Boston: Allen and Unwin, 1986. 
32  C. Hamnett, ‘Improvement Grants as an Indicator of Gentrification in Inner London’, 
Area, vol. 5, 1973, pp. 252-261; See more: P. Williams, ‘The Role of Institutions in the 
Inner-London Housing market: the Case of Islington’, Transactions of the Institute of 
British Geographers , vol. 3, 1976, pp. 23-34; N. Smith, ‘Gentrification and Capital: 
Theory, Practice, and Ideology in Society Hill’,  Antipode, vol. 11, no. 3, 1979, pp. 24-
35; J. Hackworth, and N. Smith, ‘The Changing State of Gentrification’, Tijdschrift 
voor Economische en Sociale Geografie, vol. 92, 2001, pp. 464-467. 
33  N. Smith, The New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist City , New York: 
Routledge, 1996, pp.49-89, Available at http://rohcavamaintenant.free.fr/ USB% 
20KEY%20Fahriye/k%C4%B1tap%20Neil%20Smith_The_New_Urban_ Frontier_ 
Gentrification_and_Revanchist_City.pdf,  (Accessed on 13 October 2020); Cited from 
Ibid. Hackworth and Smith, 2001. 
34    Ibid. 
35    Ibid. 
36   N. Smith, ‘Tompkins Square: Riots, Rents, and Redskins’, Portable Lower East Side , 
vol. 6, 1989, pp. 1-36. 
37    S. Zukin, op. cit. 
68  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 the 'back to the city' movement (‘neighbourhood revitalisation) which eventually 
brought new life to the downtown neighbourhoods after a long period of 
disinvestment and decay38 Zukin argued that as a result of the process of 
deindustrialization and decline in property value, the entire political economy of the 
central city was changing.39 He outlines the remarkable process of the replacement 
of traditional industries by middle-class residents: by 1980, in Manhattan about half 
of the total old buildings were converted into new ones while another 11 per cent of 
loft spaces were brought to residential uses. The recycling process of old buildings 
into new uses started with the moving out or closing down of manufacturing 
industries, particularly, garment industries. The remaining places were taken over 
by a new class of artists at a cheap price. They transferred large basic shells into 
small, luxury flats. 
The city administration and local government adopted many urban renewal 
programs, such as back to the city movement and gentrification as a recovery of 
urban decay during the 1970s. However, the global triumph of neoliberalism since 
the 1980s, particularly during the third wave of gentrification, the state directly 
intervened in intensifying the process.40 During the economic crisis of USA in the 
late 1980s, the market of inner-city residential lands collapsed acutely, along with 
other economic sectors. This context led some critics to claim that the 1990s would 
experience ‘de-gentrification’.41  
The recession, however, acted reversely more as a transition period to the next 
phase of gentrification than bringing a halt in inner-city reinvestment; and in many 
instances, it orchestrated new economic conditions and processes that made 
investors more attracted to reinvest in disinvested urban areas.42 According to 
Hackworth and Smith, gentrification that has sprouted after the 1990s on the global 
stage is more contended because of its unprecedented nature of expansion in both 
inner-city neighbourhoods and to more distant neighbourhoods.43 Moreover, while 
globalisation and new economic restructuring in the real estate industry have 
opened up new grounds for larger developers to invest in gentrification, the state 
                                                           
38    L. Lees et al., op. cit. 
39  N. Falk, ‘Loft Living: Culture and Capital in Urban Change by Sharon Zukin’, The 
Town Planning Review , vol. 59, no. 3, 1988, pp. 337–339,  www.jstor.org/stable/ 
40111707, (Accessed on 26 April 2021). 
40   M. Lauria, and L. Knopp, ‘Toward an analysis of the role of gay communities in the 
urban renaissance’, Urban Geography , Vol. 6, No. 2, 1985, pp. 152-169.  
41  C. Bagli, ‘De-gentrification’ Can Hit When Boom Goes Bust’ , The New York Observer , 
(5 August 1991), p.12, Cited on J. Hackworth and N. Smith, op. cit. 
42    Ibid.  
43    Ibid. 
Unfolding Gentrification   69 
 has played a more direct role in arranging and patronising the whole process. Post-
recession gentrification continues displacing poor urban residents from the inner-
city. As a result, all kinds of stumbling blocks against the process tend to 
completely disappear. It is the new-build gentrification that attained more 
prominence than others during the third wave of gentrification.44 
Gentrifications and erosion of the authenticity of neighbourhoods 
According to Zukin, the most striking impact of gentrification in the 21st century in 
a big city like New York is that it has ‘lost its soul’ through the process of 
gentrification.45 She elaborates how community authenticity erodes in gentrified 
areas. The authenticity of places means real places for real people who need them. 
The low-income people in New York City are always encountered with the 
problem of displacement induced by the process of gentrification, as they have no 
permanent ground to live. Initially, with the rising demands for lands by the 
outsider, the landlords start to increase rents in the neighbourhoods. Then, 
newcomers and new businesses enter the neighbourhoods, forcing original residents 
and local smaller shops to move and establish elsewhere. Later, real estate 
developers, with the help of the political groups, introduce new retail and 
residential projects, leading to a further increase in rent and costs. This process 
intensifies commercial and residential gentrification. Furthermore, it is related to 
the process of displacement. The process not only displaces old inhabitants from 
their original places but also replaces old buildings and architectures by new ones, 
and transfers small shops and business centres into giant shopping malls. Thus, 
through this process of socio-structural transformation, the neighbourhoods lose 
their original socio-cultural characters as well as authenticity.   
Class and diversity in gentrified neighbourhoods 
The historical context that led Ruth Glass to coin the term ‘gentrification’ was a 
turmoil situation in London. The situation was characterised by rising resentment 
among people over housing and class conflicts. There were other causes well such 
as increasing property prices resulting from the subsequent displacement of the 
lower-income people, rehabilitation of old houses, and changes in the patterns of 
                                                           
44  M. Davidson, and L. Lees, 'New-Build Gentrification: Its Histories, Trajectories, and 
Critical Geographies', Population, Space and Place , Vol. 16, 2009, pp. 395-411, 
Available at https://wordpress.clarku.edu/mdavidson/files/2012/02/Davidson-Lees-
2010-New-Build-Gentrification.pdf, (Accessed on 25 February 2021). 
45   S. Zukin, Naked City: The Death and Life of Authentic Urban Places, Oxford 
University Press, New York, Xviii, 2010, pp.294. 
46  T. Slater, ‘Gentrification of the City’, in E. B. Watson (ed.), Bridge: The New Blackwell 
Companion to the City , Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2011, pp.571-584. 
70  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 possession g in the second half of the twentieth century.46 It was under these 
circumstances; Ruth Glass used the term ‘gentrification’ to capture the class 
inequalities and conflicts created by the capitalist market policies. Of note, market 
policies caused eviction, homelessness, and displacement of the lower-income 
people from the central city by a class of financially fittest survivors.47 Since the 
1960s, many cities in developed countries like London, Melbourne, or Toronto 
have experienced an influx of these new middle-class residents into their centres.48  
Ley provides an empirical analysis regarding why these newcomers tended to 
locate in central city areas. He explains a transformation period through which 
these cities had gone.49 First, these cities have shifted from their previous role of 
manufacturers to new roles of centres of businesses and consumption services. This 
has eventually produced a large group of qualified new professionals whose 
consumption patterns and demands for urban living stimulated the gentrification 
process. Secondly, as the hub of business and consumption services, these central 
city areas offer various accesses to work leisure and cultural activities. They create 
the opportunities to reside in areas close to environmental and structural amenities 
like waterfronts, historical and architectural places, neighbourhood stores, 
supermarkets, schools and others alike. Thirdly, the inner city rehabilitation was 
also related to changing domestic arrangements: e.g., increasing dual-income 
households; childless, same-sex, and single-parent households; a new class of 
women having high education and better employment;  and gender equality 
concerning access to urban consumption patterns etc.50 These features of central 
city areas were different from those of suburban patriarchal households; hence, 
these areas were viewed as a place for tolerance, diversity, and freedom.51  
Therefore, one of the overall effects of the gentrification process was renovated 
housing. Another effect was the generation of new spaces of consumption that 
attracted more middle-class residents to come and settle down. All these two effects 
contributed to the subsequent increase in property value that had largely displaced 
the lower class people from the city centres.52 In this context, this paper unfolds the 
gentrification process in Dhaka city through the lens of the aforementioned socio-
structural perspective of gentrification.  
                                                           
47    R. Glass, op. cit.  
48    N. Smith and P. Williams, op. cit. 
49    D. Ley, op. cit. 
50    F. Tonkiss, op. cit. 
51    D. Ley, op. cit. 
52    F. Tonkiss, op. cit. 
 
Unfolding Gentrification   71 
 Gentrification in Dhaka City 
This section presents empirical findings of gentrification in Dhaka city. It has three 
subsections. The first subsection offers a brief account of Dhaka before 
gentrification. This is followed by an analysis of the main findings relating to 
gentrification in Dhaka city. Thirdly and finally, this section discusses Dhaka city's 
gentrification in comparison with that of the cities in the global North and also 
developed cities in Southeast/East Asia.   
Dhaka city before gentrification 
Being the hub of administrative and financial activities, Dhaka city is divided into 
two major regions: the Dhaka North City Corporation, and the Dhaka South City 
Corporation. Mirpur and Mohammadpur areas belong to the Dhaka North City 
Corporation. In this research, Dhaka’s gentrification process is keenly observed by 
taking Mirpur and Mohammadpur areas as case studies. The East Pakistan 
government established the Mirpur Model Thana in 1962, and the Mohammadpur 
Model Thana was formed by the newly independent government of Bangladesh in 
1976. Indeed, after independence in 1971, the government allocated these areas 
mainly for the lower-income people constituting both local inhabitants and people 
coming from different parts of the city. A survey by the Migratory Movement 
Research Institute in 1993 documented that 59 per cent of the lower-class people of 
Dhaka were the residents of the Mirpur area.53 Moreover, a considerable number of 
people were refugees in these areas. The East Pakistan Government allotted these 
areas to rehabilitate the non-Bengali refugees coming from Bihar (a state in eastern 
India) after the partition of India in 1947. Since the Independence of the country in 
1971, particularly throughout the 1980s, the number of these people decreased 
significantly. These people were literate, Urdu speaking, and occupied with some 
sorts of professions and businesses. Though a significant number of these people 
had managed to migrate to Pakistan after Independence, it is estimated that about 
400,000 Biharis are still living across the country. Among them, about 100000 
Biharis are hosted in different settlements of Dhaka,54 while Mohammadpur alone 
hosting about 80,000 of these people in the Geneva Camp.55 
                                                           
53   F. K. Sharna, 'Gentrification-An Important Reason for the Loss of Affordable Housing 
in Mirpur Thana’, Proceedings of the Bangladesh Planning Research Conference 5-6 
February 2016 , Department of Urban and Regional Planning, Jahangirnagar University, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh, p. 2,  Available at http://www.bip.org.bd/ SharingFiles/ 
201609161348081.pdf. (Accessed on 14 January 2020). 
54   R. Rafe, ‘The neglected 'Bihari' community in Bangladesh’, Deutsche Welle, 14 
October 2019, p.3, Available at https://www.dw.com/en/the-neglected-bihari-
community-in-bangladesh/a-50824994, (Accessed on 17 September 2020). 
55  ‘How are the Biharis of Mirpur? Voting rights, NIDs did little to change their fortunes’, 
United News of Bangladesh, 22 September 2019, p.1, Available at https://unb.com.bd/ 
category/Special/how-are-the-biharis-of-mirpur/28657, (Accessed: 22 September 2020). 
72  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 Field investigation reveals that residents in these areas were illiterate and small in 
number, engaged either in small-scale agricultural activities or involved in small 
businesses. Alamgir Hossain, a professor of Mirpur University College, describes 
their common patterns of occupations as follows:  
When I first came to Mirpur during 1980s, I saw the majority of people were floating 
people engaged in small and medium scale businesses such as grocery shops, tea stalls, 
and small battle leaf outlets. Many people worked as rickshaw pullers, day labourers, 
and vendors. Many of the local people had their own houses; and by renting them to 
new residents, they used to attain their livelihood. Some were also small farmers but 
large scale agricultural activities were never found in these areas.56 
People, particularly those who had migrated to these areas from other regions of the 
country, were associated with factory-based activities in and outside areas of the 
city. Furthermore, few people were involved in government and non-government 
professions. The main reason people migrated here lies in the cheap house-rent and 
low land-value compared to the then central Dhaka city areas (now Old Dhaka). 
Housing types were mainly kancha, semi pucca, and tin-shaded. Some brick 
buildings also existed but they were not similar to the present-day apartment 
buildings. Buildings that are now regarded as old were considered to be the most 
attractive and fashionable at that time. The communication system was also very 
poor. There were no such kind of pucca or developed roads and streets like today. 
Vehicles were mainly bullock-carts, horse carriages, rickshaws, and hand-barrows. 
Furthermore, the number of schools and colleges were only a few but increased 
sharply after the 1990s. During the 1980s, the majority of the places were 
agricultural lands, marshlands as well as wetlands. Meanwhile, many housing 
projects were initiated privately. Under those housing projects, many low-lying 
areas and water bodies were used profitably. For example, many areas at Mirpur 
were completely swampland and covered with bushes before the launch of the 
Rupnagar Housing Project and Janata Housing project. Likewise, the Mohammadia 
Housing and the Japan Garden City in Dhaka’s Mohammadpur were built over the 
slough areas. 
Changes in urban spaces and buildings 
It is revealing from data that central Dhaka city has undergone an immense 
physical expansion. The majority of its newly extended parts such as Gulshan, 
Banani, Dhanmondi, Mirpur, and Mohammadpur were brought under planned 
development projects during the 1950s and 1960s in order to accommodate middle-
class people. Both governmental and real estate corporations, albeit rarely in a well-
                                                                                                                                       
56    Alamgir Hossain, interview with author, Dhaka, 11 June 2016. 
 
Unfolding Gentrification   73 
 organised and consistent way, are found to play role in improving the structural 
amenities of the Mirpur and the Mohammadpur regions. But real estate and 
developers acted as vanguards of developing run-down areas. The Eastern Housing 
Limited, the first private company in the real estate business, has been contributing 
to facilitating urban housing needs in Dhaka since the 1960s. One of its initial 
projects is the Pallabi housing in Mirpur. The Rupnagar Residential Project, 
however, was implemented by the National Housing Authority (NHA) at Mirpur in 
1982, aimed at purveying the housing needs of the middle-class people. Similar 
results can be traced to the case of Mohammadpur. The Mohammadia Housing 
started its journey as a private housing corporation during the 1980s. The Japan 
Garden City, one of the largest housings in the area, set forth as a public-private 
partnership project after the 2000s to provide affordable housing to middle-class 
people. Moreover, the researcher finds a plethora of housing corporations running 
their projects in both areas while the majority of them are initiated by developers.  
Miraj Shikdar, a house owner of Mohammadpur, tells the author: 
Almost all the buildings in this area were constructed by private initiatives with the help 
of developers. People who could not afford to build buildings on their lands were later 
able to be house owners with the help of developers. However, our efforts were also 
appreciating. People who bought plots in housing areas voluntarily left some lands so 
that we could make streets inside the housing project area for our convenience and we 
also funded those projects.57 
After the 1990s, people coming from various parts of the city occupied almost all 
the vacant places including low lands, water bodies, bushes, as well as agricultural 
fields, and transformed them into residentially and commercially used areas. Since 
then, the number of apartment buildings has increased but remarkably increased in 
recent years. There is the growth of a large number of offices, businesses and 
corporations, banks, and other financial institutions. The construction of new roads 
and streets is remarkable.  The field visit manifests that significant changes have 
taken place over the years in the structural and architectural designs of buildings. 
The flat culture has become immensely fashionable to many housing corporations 
in recent times and even it has now become a matter of public demand. New multi-
storied apartment buildings have replaced old buildings, as apartment buildings 
appropriate urban spaces more profitably. It is also revealing from this study that 
most of the buildings are constructed between 15 to 20 years and are provided with 
modern structural equipment. The increasing population accelerated volume of 
development projects, and price hike of land – all have run at par. Zahangir Alom, a 
house owner of the Mohammadia housing, illustrates the scenario: 
                                                           
57    Miraj Shikdar, interview with author, Dhaka, May 14, 2016. 
74  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 When the Mohammadia housing started to sell plot during the 1980s, land price was 
relatively lower than other regions of Dhaka city. People like us [who migrated to the 
city for job purposes and belong to the middle or lower-middle class] found these areas 
convenient and affordable for their future generations. Per ‘ katha’ was sold at the price 
of Taka 30 to 50 thousand only; but after the 2000s, that price increased tremendously. 
Even now this area has gone far away from the capacity of the middle-class people. 
Many of the house owners do not reside in these areas. Rather, they renting their houses 
here and reside in some other high profile areas like Gulshan and Banani.58 
Moreover, House rent has increased notably in these areas over the years. It is 
revealing from data that during the 2000s, the monthly rent of a medium size flat 
(on average two bedrooms, one dining room, kitchen, two bathrooms, and balcony), 
accompanied with all types of utilities, was taka 4 to 5 thousand. Today, the same 
size flat costs about taka 15 to 20 thousand. It is also found that house rent varies 
depending on locations. For instance, house rent is two or three times higher in 
central Mirpur and Mohammadpur areas than in their adjacent run-down areas like 
Duaripara and Rupnagar tin shed areas. Similarly, Baunia, Beribadh, Jahanabad, 
Rupnagar tin-shed are among low house rent areas due to the existence of slum and 
squatter settlements for lower-class people. In the last two decades, because of this 
ever-increasing rate of house rent, lower-income people were compelled to move to 
nearby cheap house rent areas. 
Along with the process of infrastructural development, both areas have experienced 
a transition in economic activities. Several structural types of equipment are 
arranged to cater for the demand of a new growing population. Moreover, a 
plethora of offices, business and corporations, banks and other financial centres, 
and educational institutions have experienced growth in the areas. Side by side, 
services in restaurants, cafes, parlours, boutique houses and tailoring, gymnasiums, 
stationeries and confectionaries, super shops, and giant shopping malls have 
flourished in these areas, creating new job opportunities. It is estimated that 
approximately 45 per cent and 35 per cent of the total income of the people of the 
Mirpur and the Mohammadpur areas respectively are generated from service 
sectors. As Zahidul Islam, a shopkeeper in Mirpur, tells the author:  
Several years ago, only a few restaurants were serving very specific items of food like 
rice, paratha, and tea. But now thousands of hotels and restaurants have emerged in 
these areas.  Amongst them, specialised tea shops, coffee shops, Chinese restaurants, 
Indian restaurants, Italian restaurants, biriyani houses, grill houses, burger houses, pizza 
houses and so on are noticeable.59 
                                                           
58    Zahangir Alam, interview with author, Dhaka, June 9, 2016.  
59    Zahidul Islam, interview with author, Dhaka, June 12, 2016. 
Unfolding Gentrification   75 
 The present study also reveals that almost all the urban spaces in these areas are 
used for commercial purposes. From the field visit, the researcher gained a 
mountain of evidence of using public spaces for commercial intentions. Traditional 
places for spontaneous public interactions – such as parks, neighbourhood fields 
and centres, open grounds and streets – have now become either landscape of giant 
shopping malls or being appropriated by vendors and informal workers illegally for 
their subsistence. The researcher has not found any places left unused. Even 
residential buildings are using their ground floors for establishing English medium 
schools and coaching centres, art institutes, beauty parlours, as well as grocery 
shops. Besides, children are seen to use public streets as playgrounds inside the 
residential areas, as the city fails to provide spaces for public use. This vivid nature 
of using urban spaces for capital accumulation portrays the postmodern philosophy 
of market-oriented architectural and urban designs.  
Changes in class position in the neighbourhoods 
As Mirpur and Mohammadpur are extended parts of central Dhaka, these areas 
have been renewed by the people mainly coming from different parts of the country 
as well as the city. Several studies have revealed that the majority of the people are 
intra-city movers who lived previously in central Dhaka and moved to 
Mohammadpur, Mirpur, Dhanmondi, Gulshan, Banani, Uttara, and some other 
extended parts of the city after the 1980s.60  Nevertheless, more people settled in 
these areas during the 1990s and afterwards, as they tended to locate in facilitated 
neighbourhoods. These people were young, usually first-generation ‘gentrifiers’, 
involved in various businesses and professions. As expenses and unavailability of 
vacant lands and new houses increased in the central city, previous demand for 
housing near schools, supermarkets, neighbourhood stores decreased, particularly 
among families without children, students, bachelors, and working women. 
Therefore, the demand for relatively low expensive lands and building stocks 
distant from central city areas increased particularly among these groups of people. 
These new middle-class residents tended to be located in facilitated 
neighbourhoods, not far away from the central city. This, meanwhile, increased 
property value and new residential projects were needed to accommodate these 
newly emerging middle-class residents in Dhaka’s outskirt areas.  
Here it is pertinent to draw on Khatun’s study. Khatun identifies the characteristics 
of the intra-city movers who have migrated from the central city to its extended 
                                                           
60  H. Khatun, ‘Dhakaiyas and Gentrification in Old Dhaka’,  Jahanara Majid and 
MahbububAlam Trust Fund Lecture 2016 , Dhaka, Asiatic Society of Bangladesh, (17 
January 2017), pp. 1-13, Available at http://geoenv.du.ac.bd/wp-content/uploads/ 
2017/09/ Dhakaiyas- Gentrification.pdf, (Accessed on 13 February 2020). 
76  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 parts. She finds that the majority of intra-city movers were young, aged between 25 
to 40; they have nuclear families with or without children, while other 20 per cent 
had extended families with them.61 The present study also depicts that majority of 
the residents belong to the middle class in terms of their occupational categories, 
lifestyles, and consumption patterns. The dominant occupational categories are 
lawyers, doctors, engineers, academics, politicians, home and landowners, 
businesses men and corporate officials as well as government and non-government 
officials. A similar study also claims that in the Mirpur Thana, the middle-class 
people constituted about 47 per cent of the total population.62 Hedayet Miah, one of 
the respondents from Mohammadpur, tells the author: “Middle-class people, whose 
monthly income starts from nearly Taka 50,000, constitute the majority of the total 
population of the area, while the rich and the poor constitute the rest.’’63  
The phenomenon of displacement 
Although the regeneration of these outskirts has occurred with the influx of these 
middle-class people, this revitalisation process is also linked to the displacement of 
the local and lower-income people from these areas. This study holds evidence that 
due to the increasing prices of lands and the expense of living, lower-income local 
people have found it difficult to adapt to a thriving lavish lifestyle implanted by the 
process of gentrification. Eventually, they have chosen to move to nearby low-
expensive areas like Beribadh and Basila. Therefore, this process of neighbourhood 
regeneration is also associated with the emergence of slum dwellings and squatter 
settlements for the poor. As Debashis, a retired government official and house 
owner at Mohammadpur says, ‘With the progress of development activities, slums 
have shifted away; and the increase of costs of living have displaced lower-class 
people from their original places.’64 
In a similar vein, another study claims that gentrification in the areas under the 
Mirpur Thana is related to the loss of affordable housing for lower-class people.65 
Based on Smith’s rent gap theory, the study informs that the increasing rate of 
house rent, land price and the rising cost of living – all resulting from some 
developmental projects – have compelled local people to be displaced and find their 
resettlement to some nearby affordable areas. In the case of Dhaka, however, 
despite having evidence for displacing lower-income people due to the 
neighbourhood’s regeneration process, the researchers find a peculiar picture. The 
residential areas for middle-class people also contain some places for lower-class 
                                                           
61    Ibid. 
62    F. K. Sharna, op. cit., p.5. 
63    Hedayet Miah, interview with author, Dhaka, May 20, 2016.  
64    Debashis, interview with author, Dhaka, July 03, 2016. 
65    Ibid. 
Unfolding Gentrification   77 
 people. For example, in the case of Mirpur, the researcher finds the juxtaposition of 
the Rupnagar residential area for the middle-class and the Rupnagar tin shed 
residential area for lower-income people. The coexistence of the power of the 
powerful classes and the everyday resistance of the lower-class people have 
become a regular phenomenon in Dhaka, like in all other global cities.66 Moreover, 
the displacement process is a little bit ambiguous there. While many people have to 
leave the place as they fail to compete with the nascent cost of living, the incidence 
of evicting slums permanently is rare. Emdadul Haque, a resident of Mirpur, 
elaborates this: 
There are still many big slums in areas such as Jhilpar and Baganbari. Fire outbreaks 
are regular incidents there. Nobody knows who sets the fire on. After each fire 
outbreak, slum people have to live on open grounds, as they do not have other places to 
go. Sometimes police also destroy many houses so that these people leave the place but 
they do not. After some days or months, they rebuild their house perhaps with the help 
of local political groups by paying them money.67 
Another salient factor is that the displacement of lower-class people, due to de-
industrialisation or closing down/shifting industries, has not happened so strikingly 
in Dhaka unlike in other western global cities. Rather, a large number of low-
income people are still residing in these areas to provide labour-power to many 
existing small and medium industries like garment industries, backward linkage 
industries, toys companies, shoe manufacturing, and hat companies. Nevertheless, 
this study holds evidence about the displacement of low-income people induced by 
the process of gentrification. As Zakir Hossain, a house owner in the Mirpur area 
and a retired government officer says: 
Some garment and textile industries have been shifted from the Mirpur area to the Savar 
and the Gazipur regions. The workers involved in those industries would not more than 
20 to 25 per cent of the total low-income people of the area. However, all of them have 
not been displaced with their promising working industries. Yet, a large number of them 
are still here and have got new jobs, as many manufacturing industries are also available 
here.68 
Discussion   
Dhaka city has experienced an immense physical extension from its city centre to 
the northern part since the country emerged as an independent nation in 1971. 
Mohammadpur and Mirpur are among its extended northern parts which initially 
                                                           
66  S. Zukin, ‘The postmodern invasion’ , International Journal of Urban and Regional 
Research, vol. 16, no. 3, 1992, pp. 485-495.  
67    Emdadul Haque, interview with author, Dhaka, June 18, 2016. 
 
68    Zakir Hossain, interview with author, Dhaka, July 05, 2016. 
78  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 served to host a large number of refugee people. People gradually started to come 
and settle down in these areas because of the comparatively lower value of the 
property than in the central city areas. This period, however, can be illustrated with 
an increased property value of the study areas with several knock-on effects.  In the 
case of Dhaka, unlike the global Northern cities, there is a dearth of evidence of 
‘sweat equity’ gentrification. Here, ‘sweat equity’ gentrification refers to individual 
household effort to renovate run-down neighbourhoods. Instead, at the very 
beginning, developments of run-down neighbourhoods resembled more 
suburbanisation than gentrification, as references of direct displacement of people 
and community were also lacking in those instances. This is because being the 
outskirts of the city centres, these areas were experiencing the first phase of 
development with population migration, thereby spurring property value than 
displacing people.   
The neighbourhood revitalisation can be traced back more specifically to the 1980s 
and the 1990s. The timing is also circumscribed as the second wave of the 
proliferation of gentrification on the stage of global North which is also identified 
with congealing private market intervention in the process. In Dhaka, the majority 
of the run-down neighbourhoods were brought into the developmental scheme 
during this period and onwards mainly through real estate initiatives. Regenerating 
old architectures by attracting middle-class people as a way of economic revival 
was the predominant drive in the cities of the north-eastern USA and Western 
Europe. In contrast to these cities, the distinctive fact about Dhaka is that all the 
residential and commercial projects were built on either vacant places or wetlands. 
Henceforth, incidents of direct displacement of local and poor people lack ample 
evidence during this time, albeit indirect displacement was frequent as a result of 
‘price shadowing’.69 
However, remarkable changes in the neighbourhoods relating to residential and 
commercial developments are noticeable after the 2000s. Interestingly, many key 
features of the second-wave gentrification, as outlined by Hackworth and Smith, 
can be linked to the development of Dhaka city during the 2000s when the timing is 
correlated to the third wave in other global cities. The distinction of the two phases 
– the second and the third waves – has been seemed to be blurred in Dhaka, as 
some instances suggest. In the second wave of gentrification, large scale 
displacement of lower-class people and their counter resentment was a regular 
phenomenon in many western cities but the subsequent phase was characterised by 
the disappearance of any effective resistance from the victims because of their 
                                                           
69  M. Davidson, and L. Lees, op. cit, p.398. 
Unfolding Gentrification   79 
 gradual marginalisation.70 In Dhaka, eviction of slums and squatter settlements in 
the name of beautification or sometimes through rampant fire outbreaks are 
frequent phenomena. The nature of such displacement, however, was rather volatile 
and temporary. In the majority of such cases, the displaced people resettle in 
previous grounds or nearby areas within a very short time. Reclaiming urban spaces 
by evictees through different negotiation strategies with local power bodies also 
holds relevance in many other places in Dhaka.71 In this area, further research is 
urged to understand intensively the localised nature of displacement induced by 
gentrification. Gentrification, induced by neoliberal agenda, in the cities of both the 
western and the developed East Asian countries is another remarkable issue. The 
increasing role of the state in tandem with the corporate developers is obvious in 
many cities of East Asian countries such as China, South Korea, Japan, Bangkok, 
and Cambodia.72 Likewise, in Dhaka city, the government’s role in coordinating 
real estate and corporate developers through different market incentives are 
appreciable.73 But the state’s direct and strenuous involvement to orchestrate the 
whole system is yet to be reflected. While real estate as a housing sector is fairly 
getting the nod, it has experienced many vicissitudes since its beginning. 
Concerned actors are still facing a severe crisis due to the lack of sufficient 
financing, such that they look for the state’s support to boost this sector.74 This 
analysis alone, however, is not adequate to address the nexus across the role of the 
state, real estate, and gentrification under neoliberal economic reform in Dhaka 
city. Further research is necessary to address the issue.  
The type of gentrification experienced in Dhaka corresponds more precisely to 
new-built gentrification which is seen as a special type of gentrification arising 
during the third wave in cities of the global North. As regards land use in new-build 
gentrification, the usage of existing urban buildings goes beyond the purpose of 
rehabilitation. The primary form of land use here is of two kinds: demolition/ 
reconstruction, and constructing new buildings on vacant lands.75 Unlike cities in 
the global North, gentrification in Dhaka does not imply the rehabilitation of old 
                                                           
70   J.  Hackworth and N. Smith, op. cit., pp.466-468. 
71   S. Arefin, and T. Rashid, ‘The Urban Poor in Dhaka: Perspectives on the Right to the 
City’, Journal  of Urban and Regional Analysis , vol. 13, no. 1, 2021, p.154, Available at 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/ 347848740_THE_URBAN_POOR_in_DHAKA_P
ERSPECTIVES_ON_THE_RIGHT_TO_THE_CITY , (Accessed on 23 April 2021). 
72  R. Moore, op.cit., p.126 
73  S. Barua, A.H.A.M. Mridha, and R.H. Khan, ‘Housing Real Estate Sector in 
Bangladesh: Present Status and Policies Implications’, ASA University Review , vol. 4, 
no. 1, (January- June 2010), p.250. 
74    Ibid. 
75  M. Davidson and L. Lees, op.cit. p. 398. 
80  Tamanna Rashid 
 
 houses for residential use. This is because Dhaka, just like many other cities in 
South East and East Asian countries, has not experienced the process of 
deindustrialisation. It has been claimed that East Asian countries have not gone 
through the deindustrialisation and urban decline similar to western countries76; 
they have always concentrated more on improving poor infrastructure and 
housing77. Dhaka city, however, exhibits neither a fully manufactured nor a 
completely service-oriented economy. Therefore, gentrification as a by-product of 
the economic transition of the manufacturing sector to the service sector is not 
relevant to Dhaka. Gentrification in each form has been linked to the commercial 
utilisation of urban land. Investing capital in urban structures – e.g., built 
environments or Brownfield sites – vividly describes a new form of capital 
accumulation that has emerged as a by-product of neoliberal economic reform. This 
process of market-oriented use of urban spaces subsequently excludes those people 
who have the right to consume these places or are the ‘authentic users’ of the 
places.78 The urban places for spontaneous public interaction like parks, 
neighbourhood fields and centres, and even vacant lands have now become an 
instrument of capital accumulation. Therefore, gentrification in Dhaka unfolds 
opportunities for the middle class and upper class but it rejects the poor and throws 
them into a new landscape of homelessness. 
Conclusion 
Gentrification has been echoed everywhere as the most widely used urban 
regeneration strategy. Dhaka, however, lacks any vibrant urban regeneration. Using 
two areas of Dhaka as case studies, this paper has unfolded the gentrification 
process in Dhaka city. It is revealing that gentrification in Dhaka resonates with 
new-built gentrification where the neoliberal market performs the predominant role. 
The real estate and developers are more vibrant in renovating disinvested urban 
lands and transferring them into new enclaves of middle-class urban residents in 
Dhaka city. However, the government’s effort to orchestrate the whole system, 
identical to other developed cities in East Asia as well as Western Europe, is not 
still sufficiently relevant. Instead, the real estate sector acts as a precursor in 
investing and reinvesting in all run-down areas which, in turn, fosters economic 
                                                           
76   H.B. Shin, L. Lees, and E. Lopez- Morales, op.cit. 
77  S. Kyung, and Kwang-Joong Kim, ‘State-facilitated gentrification” in Seoul, South 
Korea: for whom, by whom and what result?’ Paper presented at the International 
RC21 conference by 2011 session: 2.  Social Consequences of Gentrification, 
Amsterdam, (7-9 July 2011), pp. 1-26, Available at http://www.rc21.org/ conferences/ 
amsterdam2011/edocs/Session%202/2-1-Kyung.pdf; Cited from R. Moore, op. cit., 
p.125. 
78   S. Zukin, op. cit.  
Unfolding Gentrification   81 
 flow and property value. Further research would consider this by addressing 
different actors involved in this process.  
This geographical refurbishment creates many other socio-structural changes in the 
neighbourhoods, incorporating residential and commercial values of urban spaces 
with some trickle-down effects. The most controversial effect is the displacement 
of lower-class people against nascent urban development. Similar to the 
gentrification in the western cities, gentrification in Dhaka is also coupled with the 
consequence of the displacement of lower-income people from their authentic 
place, creating the city as the geography of a distinctive group of people. This is the 
point that needs immediate concern from policymakers because ensuring 
everyone’s place in the city is a prerequisite for sustainable development as well as 
creating an inclusive approach to city development. Gentrification in Dhaka 
proceeds with urban development, displacing the authentic users/local people. Side 
by side, it corrodes the intrinsic nature of the neighbourhoods and creates a new 
cultural identity for the newcomer, requiring the attention of future researchers. In 
many instances, however, gentrification has appeared with some localised features 
of resettling evicted neighbourhoods through distinctive mechanisms with local 
authorities. This feature in particular has opened a new question to the 
understanding of the local political context of gentrification through ethnographic 
research. 
 
