       http://www.ierek.com/press           Print ISSN: 2357-0849  International Journal on: Proceedings of Science and Technolgy  
 pg. 1                                                                                                                                                                                    
Adapting Geographies of Gentrification in Egypt: Lesson learned from Fatimid Cairo and Heliopolis.   Muhammad Eldaidamony 1, Ahmed A. A. Shetawy,2 Yehya Serag, 3 Abeer Elshater, 4  1 Teaching Assistant, Higher Technological Institute, PhD Candidate, Ain Shams University, Faculty of Engineering, Department of Urban Design and Urban Planning 2 Professor, Ain Shams University, Faculty of Engineering, Department of Urban Design and Urban Planning 3,4 Associate Professor, Ain Shams University, Faculty of Engineering, Department of Urban Design and Urban Planning Keywords  
Fatimid Cairo; Gentrification; 
Geographies of Gentrification; 
Heliopolis ; Historical Cairo   Abstract   
Since the 1960’s, gentrification has been  confused with other urban notions such as 
upgrading and renewal, regardless of its economic and political perspectives .  
Whereas  It has been processing and evolving in urban neighborhoods, especially in 
the western countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom , away 
from the developing countries . It took place also in other countries outside the core 
cities of gentrification. Researchers and urban planners agree d that to re -energize 
the study of gentrification is to focus on its ‘geograph ies’ which are; super -
gentrification , third -world immigration – the global city , black/ethnic minority 
gentrification – race and gentrification  and liv ability/urban policy.   To this point, 
the cultural diversity was  omitted from the geography of gentrification , something  
that the paper will try to elaborate on and identify. Due to socio -cultural differences 
between gentrification taking place in the developed world and that happening in 
the developing countries , the research suggests adding two new categories to the 
geographies of gentrification to reflect the specificities of  Egypt.   For instance, 
gentrification in Egypt  is driven by other ge ographies of gentrification; namely, 
historical -tourism gentrification and contracting/real estate gentrification.  Thus,  
monitoring, observation, and analyzing of Heliopolis and Fatimid Cairo will be 
used to achieve the paper main objective ; to adapt the gentrification process with 
the Egyptian case studies, and to fill the gap in  the gentrification literature 
regarding the geographies of gentrification in developing countries , the theme that 
will estab lish a new level of gentrification and open new field of research in Egypt. 
Therefore,  urban planning will have a different valid scope in Egypt and provide 
decision makers with a new tool to develop and maintain the urban planning 
approaches in Egypt .   1 Introduction  After fifty years of gentrification worldwide, the time is right to have a decent amount of literature, books, research, papers, and more written and applied materials for this topic. The material of gentrification varies from theoretical to a kind of applied studies. As the main issue which richness the gentrification literature is the different case studies away from the so called “core cities”, London and New York. Case studies which has different spatial location, economic, social and cultural environments, also to fill in the gap in literature regarding the geographies of gentrification in Egypt. However, what Ward, 1993 mentioned regarding the biases of some geographers as UKUS ethnocentrism, that 'too many Anglo-American geographers remain ignorant about processes operating outside of their own immediate cultural context' (1993: 1133). Thus, this research will try to differentiate between the different 
Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 2                                                                                                                                                                                 notions and urban models, revitalization, upgrading, regeneration, renewal, and gentrification. It would also explore the economic, political, cultural and social, perspectives of gentrification, which would widen the scope to cover gentrification aspects in Egypt. So far, the research will help you understand the current geographies of gentrification and open the field for two new geographies which will be introduced by the research for two main aims, first, to fill in the gap in literature regarding gentrification in developing countries, second to cover the social and cultural differences between developed and developing countries’ gentrification. Meanwhile, the gentrification process in Fatimid Cairo and Heliopolis is a way to fulfill the residents’ requirements and demands, residents who are benefiting from the concentric spatial location close to job centers and urban facilities. This will work as part of the back to the city movement that was  defined by Neil Smith in1979.  2    Concepts in Urban Development Gentrification is usually mixed with other urban models (Dalla Longa, Remo (Ed.) 2011) such as, upgrading, renewal, revitalization, and other terms. This mix rises based on the spatial and social perspectives and differences, that each author argues. Hereby, the researcher will try to differentiate between the main urban models to identify the main path of the research, and not to mix gentrification with other urban models, which sometimes may be misleading and cause confusion with the gentrification process.   Upgrading, or sometimes called as slum improvement, as mentioned on the Massachusetts Institute of Technology webpage, is basically an urban project for “slum improvement in low income urban communities is many things, but at its simplest it has come to mean a package of basic services: clean water supply and adequate sewage disposal to improve the well-being of the community. But fundamental is legalizing and ‘regularizing’ the properties in situations of insecure or unclear tenure”. Here, urban upgrading provides a package of improvements in streets, footpaths and drainage, also solid waste collection, along with street lights for security and night activity, electricity to homes, providing clinics and health education programs, school facilities and teacher training and lastly programs are offered to increase income earning opportunities and the general economic health of a community. Urban upgrading is broadly defined as physical, social, economic, organizational, and environmental improvements undertaken cooperatively among citizens, community groups, businesses, and local authorities to ensure sustained improvements in the quality of lives for individuals (Cities Alliance, 2003). Meanwhile gentrification is basically starting within a neighbourhood which already has the main facilities, but it works on improving those facilities. Gentrification comes first with economic factors while upgrading take economic factors lately.  Robin Richards )2014(, referred to urban renewal as “a set of plans and activities to upgrade neighborhoods and suburbs that are in state of distress or decay”. Urban renewal programs address the physical aspects of urban decay. Urban problems such as deteriorating housing, poor physical infrastructure (including water and sanitation services), and poor community services such as sports and recreational amenities are addressed through such programs”. Moreover, urban renewal can be distinguished from urban regeneration. As urban regeneration is a wider ranging, more holistic policy intervention that incorporates physical, social, and environmental regeneration (Lang, 2005). Urban renewal was considered as an alternative to the unpopular policy of “slum clearance” involving demolishing decaying housing and slum areas and relocating the people living there to other parts of a city. While urban renewal has negative consequences of social segregation and social equity, gentrification main negative consequence is displacement. Moreover, Neil Smith (2010) argued that urban renewal, like rehabilitation, occurs where a rent gap has been opened, but in the case of renewal either the dilapidated stock is unsound structurally, or the remaining structures are unsuitable for new uses.   According to the IGI Global dictionary, urban revitalization is a process by which a part of the city in social, urban or economic crisis undergoes a transformation deep, to reverse the declining trend. While, gentrification has worked its way into the planning manifestos of urban policy agendas to improve the economic, physical, and social outlook of disinvested central-city locations around the world. Often disguised as regeneration', 'renaissance', 'revitalization', or 'renewal', gentrification has become, in the words of one renowned gentrification scholar, 'a global urban strategy' and 'the consummate expression of an emerging neo-liberal urbanism' (N. Smith 2002). Thus, it is hard to be against revitalization, regeneration, or renaissance, but much easier to be against gentrification.   R. Dalla Longa (2011), argued in her chapter of Urban Models, the different notions of urban development projects, and mentioned that the struggle over words might seem obscure or tedious, stranding us 'on the desert island of terminological debate' (N. Smith 1996b: 1203). Moreover, this terminological struggle blurred in to a second set of more conceptual disputes. 'Gentrification' is still understood as a term of class conflict that raises questions of equity and fairness; and so it is crucial that we challenge the political campaigns of those who are trying to displace the term in favor of soft euphemisms (regeneration, revitalization, renaissance, re-urbanization, residentialization, etc.) and those such as Andres Duany (2001) trying to redefine the term as a badge of honor for gentrifiers. One of the lessons of the sociology of knowledge is that words are not passive; indeed, they help to shape and create our perceptions of the world around us.  
Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 3                                                                                                                                                                                 3    Literature Review 3.1 Gentrification perspectives, cultural, economic, political, and social.  Since the process of gentrification started to flourish and gain more attention, the literature about it started to boom as well. Most of this literature concerns the contemporary processes or its effects: the socio-economic and cultural characteristics of immigrants, displacement, the role in redevelopment, benefits to the city, and creation and destruction of community. Little attempt has been made to construct historical explanations of the process, to study causes rather than effects, Instead, explanations are very much taken for granted and fall into two categories: cultural and economic (Smith, 2011).   Culturally, popular among revitalization theorists is the notion that young, usually professional, middle-class people have changed their lifestyle, those youngsters are the main engine for the gentrification process. As according to Gregory Lipton, these changes have been significant enough to "decrease the relative desirability of single-family, suburban homes" (1977, p. 146). Thus, with a trend toward fewer children, postponed marriages, and a fast rising divorce rate, younger homebuyers and renters are trading in the tarnished dream of their parents for a new dream defined in urban rather than suburban terms. Other researchers emphasize the search for socially distinctive communities as sympathetic environments for individual self-expression (Winters 1978), while still others extend this into a more general argument. In contemporary "post-industrial cities," according to D. Ley, white-collar service occupations supersede blue-collar productive occupations, and this brings with it an emphasis on consumption and amenity not work.   Economically, as the cost of newly constructed housing continues to rise and its distance from the city center to increase, the rehabilitation and re-urbanization of inner- and central city structures is seen to be more viable economically. Additionally, with some governmental policies to fill in the left over vacant lands with new mixed-use buildings to fulfill the highly demand on urban facilities. Old but structurally sound properties can be purchased and rehabilitated for less than the cost of comparable new houses, especially in historic and high-density neighborhoods where land value is relatively high. In addition, many researchers stress the high economic cost of commuting and the economic benefits of proximity to work, by which bad transportation networks increases the demand on concentric housing locations. According to the neoclassical theory, suburbanization reflects the prefer-ence for space and the increased ability to pay for it due to the reduction of transportation and other constraints. Similarly, gentrification is explained as the result of an alteration of preferences and/or a change in the constraints determining which preferences will or can be implemented. Thus, in the media and the research literature a like, the process is viewed as a” back to the city movement.” This applies as much to the earlier gentrification projects, such as Philadelphia's Society Hill. Furthermore, the relation between political economy and gentrification challenges the dominant inclination among academics to attend narrowly to debates surrounding this relationship. Specifically, how elites' interests are prioritized over and above those with less economic or political capital, and how this inequality is reproduced in and marks urban lives and landscapes. It attends to the role of coalitions of elites (Logan & Molotch 1987) with the broad economic and political shifts that help gentrification at the cost of attention to numerous other facets.    Socially, the University of Chicago policy analyst John Betancur (2002), who, in a study of gentrification in West Town, Chicago, argues that gentrification is really a struggle between community and accumulation. Gentrification has a face - a set of forces manipulating factors such as class and race to determine a market outcome. The most traumatic aspect is the destruction of the elaborate and complex community fabric that is crucial for low-income, immigrant and minority communities-without any compensation. For Betancur (2002), gentrification is not about social mix, emancipation, creativity, and tolerance; it is about arson, abandonment, displacement, 'speculation and abuse', ethnic minority tenant hardships, and class conflict. For instance, when we discuss how we should define the "gentrifier" we are not just debating the role and characteristics of a set of actors involved in gentrification, but also what we mean when we refer to someone as "middle class" and how to understand the relationship between traits such as race, income, and gender, and ideology and behavior. Tim Butler and Garry Robson (2001a; Butler with Robson 2003). One negative effect, the displacement of the working class and/or ethnic minorities, was (and still is) of serious concern, as Powell and Spencer (2003) figured in Chicago.  3.2 The economic, social and cultural difference between gentrification in Egypt, UK & USA  Economically, there is a difference gap between the gentrification in the core countries and Egypt; for instance, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (PPP) per Capita of each country. According to the World Bank, from 1990 to 2016 based on actual data, the GDP of Egypt, United Kingdom and United states of America, increased from 3,819 USDto 11,150 USD, from 16,739 USDto 43,081 and from 23,955 USDto 57,638 USD respectively. The them that reflects the economic differences for each country, thus the income per capita and social class levels also differ. So, the economic status of the residents are different when identifying the middle classes in each country.  Ramzy, 1997 and 1993, defined the middle class as, it is the class which gain wages from working in the governmental jobs, public sector, and private free-lance jobs, he also categorized the middle class to three different categories, high, middle and low. Ramzy also mentioned that there is a big difference between the high and low classes regarding income, consumption, savings, working rehabilitation, education, and class awareness.  
Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 4                                                                                                                                                                                 However, according to Central Agency for Public Mobilisation and Statistics (CAPMAS) in 2015, the Egyptian poverty line stands at an income of LE 5,787.9 (327 USD) annually and LE 482 (27 USD) monthly, thus around 27.8 % of Egyptian population is under the poverty line. While in the United States according to the Census Bureau in 2013, the annual income threshold for being counted as living in poverty was 11,490 USDfor a person, and monthly 957.5 USD, thus around 15 % of the American population are under the poverty line. Almost a 33 % of the UK population fell below the official poverty line at some point between 2010 and 2013, with 14, 758 English Pounds GBP (19,720 USD) annually and 1,230 English Pounds GBP (1,644 USD) monthly (Cribb, Jonathan, 2015). Besides, each country has its own architecture, urban planning practices and urban environment that was accumulated throw through centuries, with social, culture and economic mixture, starting from historical ancient Egyptian, Islamic and modern architecture. So far, the main gentrifiers in Egypt are the young families, mainly with high education level, with one or two children, who are the main engine for the gentrification process due to their need to find a comfortable housing, while in USA and UK are the young professionals, gays and students, which were referred to, by Butler 1997, as the new middle class and, by Richard Florida 2003, as the creative class. Additionally, the culture of mobility and commuting varies from being attached to your home and family, as a study which was done in 1996 proved that the average age of leaving the family in Egypt was 33 years of age while in UK is 24 years of age (Eurostat, 2013).    3.3 Geographies of gentrification  As Loretta Lees, 2000 believes that the way to re-energize the study of gentrification is to focus on what Ley (1996) has called the ‘geography of gentrification’. The ‘geography of gentrification’ emerges as the common denominator for both the recent changes in the gentrification process and the holes in the gentrification literature. Thus, she identified four (inter-related) which research into the ‘geography of gentrification’ needs to address: 1) financifiers – super-gentrifiers; 2) third-world immigration – the global city; 3) black/ethnic minority gentrification – race and gentrification; and 4) livability/urban policy – discourse on gentrification.   In addressing the issue of financifiers gentrification researchers must return, as Bondi (1999a) did albeit inadvertently, to a consideration of temporality. Wyly and Hammel (1999) have also found that capital flows are being redirected and focused on few highly desirable neighborhoods. The whole concept of urban community is in transition, the financifiers’ ties to the community, to the neighborhood, are much weaker than those of the gentrifiers of old. The financifier has a much less deeply rooted relationship with his or her neighborhood – as with the highly mobile capital they work with, these super-gentrifiers are more mobile too – their identity is arguably more fluid than rooted. As in the case of third-world immigrants, black and ethnic minority gentrification has scarcely been researched either (see Schaffer and Smith, 1986; Taylor, 1992; Smith, 1996, for research into black gentrification). Black gay gentrifiers in the Castro District of San Francisco in the 1970s came up against racism. This distorts the image of gentrification as liberal tolerance. It also points to the complex intricacies within social cleavages – black, gay and middle class and white gay racist gentrifier. Blacks as seen in Smith’s (1996) ‘revanchist city thesis’, are often portrayed as the ‘victims’ of the gentrification process. But blacks can also be the ‘agents’ of gentrification (see Taylor, 1992; Lees, 1996; Downer, 1999).   Nevertheless, deconstructing discourse on gentrification is important and it is nowhere more so than when considering recent urban policy statements/initiatives by governments in both the UK and the USA. For example, the British Urban Task Force’s report Towards an urban renaissance (DETR, 1999) and the US Department of Housing and Urban Development’s The state of the cities report (1999) both interweave urban regeneration policy with gentrification practices and environmentalism. Gentrification in the guise of urban livability/sustainability is constructed as the medicine for the problems endured by British and American cities. The ‘geography of gentrification’, works on many different levels – international comparison, intranational, and citywide comparison. Moreover, in the literature on gentrification we can see that even within a single city gentrification of a similar time period has a quite different geography depending on its site. It would also enable us to consider the merits or dangers of cities further down the urban hierarchy taking on board the gentrification practices of cities higher up the urban hierarchy, cities with a very different geography.  4. New geographies of gentrification in Egypt While in order to achieve one of the objectives of the study is to explore the new geographies of gentrification, proposed by the research, related to the case study in Egypt. These new geographies will be explanined in the next few sentences to clarify the idea and to fullfill the literature gap regarding the case studies in Egypt.  4.1 Historical - Tourism gentrification  Meanwhile, in a previous study in 2015 (A. A. Shetway et. al., 2015), the gentrification process was driven by cultural tourism and commercial activities in Historic Fatimid Cairo, Cultural tourism development was the potential for gentrification to take place. As the gentrification spots started to be active, the buffered building around it started to change dynamically. By which the neighbouring buildings owners seek to benefit as well from the development around them. Gotham, 2005 referred to tourism gentrification as the transformation of a middle-class neighborhood into a relatively affluent and exclusive enclave marked by a proliferation of corporate entertainment 
Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 5                                                                                                                                                                                 and tourism venues. Historically, the Vieux Carre, New Orleans, USA, has been the home of diverse groups of people. Over the past two decades, however, median incomes and property values have increased, escalating rents have pushed out lower-income people and African Americans, and tourist attractions and large entertainment clubs now dominate much of the neighborhood. It is argued that the changing flows of capital into the real estate market combined with the growth of tourism enhance the significance of consumption-oriented activities in residential space and encourage gentrification. So far, gentrification as an expression of consumer demands, individual preferences or market laws of supply and demand. It examines how the growth of securitization, changes in consumption and increasing dominance of large entertainment firms manifest through the development of a tourism industry, giving gentrification its own distinct dynamic and local quality, this can happen not only in New Orleans but also in the case studies in Cairo as well. As local elites use tourism as, a strategy of economic revitalization, tourism services and facilities are incorporated into redevelopment zones and gentrifying areas. In this new urban landscape, gentrification and tourism amalgamate with other consumption-oriented activities such as shopping, restaurants, cultural facilities and entertainment venues. That blurring of entertainment, commercial activity and residential space leads to an altered relationship between culture and economics in the production and consumption of urban space. As contemporary cities increasingly turn to tourism as a means of economic development, and as gentrification expands in many cities, we need more critical accounts of the nexus of tourism and gentrification. Indeed, tourism study can contribute much to on-going debates of urban ethnic transformation, globalization and gentrification.  4.2  Real estate / contracting gentrification  The real estate activity is an essential sector worldwide and especially in Egypt. Housing supply was mostly by the private sector until the late 1950s, when rent control laws were applied. A sizeable proportion of developers in the housing market, as a result, shifted their investment to other fields. After that, the public sector assumed a major role in housing supply through central and local government, development agencies, and public housing companies. The semi-public agencies helped in the production of housing units - new built housing units - through housing cooperatives, Al Awqaf Egyptian Authority, banks, insurance companies, and the construction of housing for individual workers. The private sector diminished to a few individual landlords, owner-occupiers, and small development companies. Provision of infrastructure remained the responsibility of the government. The total number of housing units built per year by both public and private sectors decreased from 56,000 units in the 1950s to fewer than 30,000 in the 1960s. The change in economic policy in the second half of the 1970s caused drastic changes in the housing market. The annual number of units built increased steadily to reach more than 180,000 in 1990. The role of the public sector diminished and was limited to the provision of low- and medium-cost units, mainly in the new towns and settlements around the Greater Cairo Region. Private investment in the housing and real estate sectors has increased continuously in the past two decades, even though these sectors are, in theory, tightly regulated and rent controlled and suffer from credit shortages. According to estimates by the Ministry of Housing and Reconstruction, private sector gross investment in housing grew from LE 732 million in 1982/83 to LE 2,950 million in 1991/92, representing more than 25 per cent of the total private investment in Egypt. On the other hand, public gross investment in housing fluctuated from LE 67 million in 1982/83 to LE 370 million in 1986/87 and back to LE 91 million in 1991/92, representing less than 1 per cent of total Egyptian public investment.   Similarly, gross value added in private housing sector rose from LE 350 million in 1982/83 to LE 2,223 million in 1991/92, whereas it increased only from LE 62 million to LE 127 million in public housing sector over the same period. In 1991/92, the private sector represented 97 per cent of the total investment in housing and 95 per cent of the total value added in the housing sector. Investment of private sector in housing included the high demand resulting from urban population growth. In addition, private sector developers find ways around the rent control laws, such as build-to-own arrangements, and cash advances paid to developers. The illegal/informal housing that represents a large portion of the Egyptian housing market is totally financed by private investment. Given the limited choice of alternative investments in the Egyptian market (especially during periods of recession), real estate is a major outlet for domestic savings, especially for the remittances of Egyptians working in oil-exporting Arab countries (World Bank, 1994). This is relevant to gentrification as more demand for first and second home increases the possibilities of gentrification in Cairo.  5. Methodology   Throughout the gentrification related literature, authors have been considering the positive and negative consequences of gentrification in a way that it, sometimes, lacks the sense of relevance and application from an urban planning and architecture perspective. As gentrification is a recent field of research in Egypt, the research being described in this paper will explore new factors which affect the gentrification process in Heliopolis and Historic Cairo. However, as many authors tried to find gentrification indicators, few who had identified them. Meanwhile, after the researcher had investigated, reviewed and evaluated many different indicators, the researchers found that the gentrification indicators of Kennedy and Leonard (2001) are the most suitable for the case studies, as discussed in previously published research work (Shetawy et. al., 2015, Shetawy, et. al., 2017). Thus, assures the research point of view: what can be applied for example in Saint-Henri and Lower NDG, Montréal and Toronto, must not by default be applied to other countries due to social and cultural differences. Moreover, the researcher 
Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 6                                                                                                                                                                                 investigated and analyzed, census data analysis from the Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics reports, of years 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006, data, such as the number of apartments, tenants, new businesses, death and birth rates, urbanization projects, within the last four decades, to indicate gentrification in the case studies. The case studies analysis used for examining the gentrification indicators; is to overlap and join the urban planning survey typology (land use, heights, conditions of buildings, etc.), to compare recent studies related to the case studies, to reflect the different waves of gentrification on the case studies, and to present the results of the study population interviews. 6. Heliopolis and Elgamalia as two case studies of gentrification   Cairo as the capital of Egypt has been attracting many capitals investment, Cairo witnessed urbanization, suburbanization, and deurbanization processes in different neighborhoods. Recently, Cairo is witnessing a wave of re-urbanization to regenerate the city center neighborhoods to the loss of its important urban facilities and services due to the suburbanization process. With the wave of suburbanization and the belief of having a multinuclear city centers, Heliopolis and Elgamalia neighborhoods worked as a vital nuclei and destination for many activities. Heliopolis is a vital center of the eastern part of Cairo, especially for residential, entertainment and leisure, with many cafes, restaurants, green areas and financial administrative buildings, especially Elkorba district. While, Elgamalia, is the city center for commercial, shopping, textiles, jewelry workshops with many cafes, bazars, and restaurants, monumental and religious buildings, especially Fatimid historic Cairo. The two case studies are characterized by their unique architectural styles. On the one hand, Elgamalia in historic Cairo with Islamic architecture monumental buildings, from the medieval ages, that made it a UNESCO world heritage site. On the other hand, Heliopolis is characterized by its mixed architectural styles including Moorish, Islamic and Belgian modern architecture from the beginning of the 20th century. Figure 1, shows the location of both case studies on the middle and eastern side of Cairo. So far, the leading, primary, and secondary indicators of gentrification used for the different analysis’ types below, those types of indicators are identified by Kennedy and Leonard in 2001.   
 Moreover, the statistical data was analyzed on different levels, starting with the demographic data and census (population, number of families, etc.) then to the housing circumstances (residential units, occupancy rates, ownership for buildings, and number of units built, and housing types). Also analyzing the socio-cultural, interviews with the study of population and educational status of residents, and the economic status (economic activities and professional activities, and buildings used for work). The study population included some interviews with governmental bodies, and local authority, Non-Governmental Organizations. And as renting – renting refers to the rent gap which plays a very important role in the gentrification process – some interviews were done with residents in rented accommodation and owners (see Shetawy et al., 2015). Some tourists and passersby were also interviewed. Thus, each type of analysis indicates the occurrence of gentrification as will be shown in the coming lines.   7. Results and discussions  7.1. Demographic analysis  The population of Elgamalia decreased from 166,803 inhabitants to 56,626 inhabitants, losing about 66 % of its population, in the last four decades. This indicates that this neighborhood is repelling inhabitants to move from it to the neighboring neighborhoods by which the existing buildings are reused or converted to another use which if compared with the economic activities, with the increased needs to services proves the changing of Elgamalia from a residential neighborhood to a service and hospitality neighborhood, which calls for urban development projects by which increases the possibilities of gentrification. On the other hand, Heliopolis population increased from 127,199 inhabitants to 141,565 inhabitants in the same period, by a 10 % increased population. Thus, there is a need for housing more than the need to other uses as it will be clarified in the economic analysis. This indicates that Heliopolis has more need to residential uses more than Elgamalia. Also, increased families, as average family members decreased from 4.8 in 1976 to 3.6 in 2017 in Elgamalia, and from 4.3 in 1976 to 3.1 in 2017 in Heliopolis.     
Figure 1 (a) the location of the case 
studies in Cairo.  Figure 1 (b) Heliopolis case study location and 
surrounding area  Figure 1 (c) Elgamalia case study 
location and surrounding area.  Source: Adapted by the researcher using CAPMAS Maps and Google maps, 2017  

Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 7                                                                                                                                                                                 7.2. Housing circumstances  While analyzing the housing circumstances, gentrification is becoming more and more obvious in the case studies. Housing circumstances data provided indicated gentrification with many means, nationality owners for all buildings regardless of their use and it was classified to Egyptians, Arabs and other foreign nationalities. Also, the percentage of owned or rented apartments, indicating to which direction the ownership is oriented in the neighborhood more rented or owned. Moreover, occupancy rates and the housing types of each case study, indicates the level of housing and the number of persons per apartment. The graph showing the number of buildings according to Egyptian ownership shows that there is an increase in the number of buildings owned by Egyptians in both case studies since 1986 till 2006, this increase did not affect the occupancy rate. On the contrary, as the occupancy rate decreased from 2.4 to 1.18 person per room in Elgamalia while decreased from 1.1 to 0.83 person per room in Heliopolis. This is accompanied with a general decrease in the number of units built per year in Cairo with an expectation to be increased again due to the waves of re-urbanization in the last two decades.   
 So far, Elgamalia repels foreign investments as the number of buildings owned by foreign nationals from Arab and other countries decreased from 26 to 5 buildings only for Arabs while decreased from 57 to 2 buildings only for other countries, between 1986 and 2006. This contrasts with Heliopolis, which attracts more international investments due to the opening of many international financial headquarters and international restaurants and cafes. As the number of buildings owned by Arab nationals increased by almost 40 %, from 65 to 103 buildings while for other nationalities doubled from 41 to 80 buildings in the same period. Meaning that, gentrification lead by national gentrifiers while in Elgamalia, gentrifiers are internationals.   
 Since 1976, residents tend to own their apartments instead of renting them, as in both case studies there is a tendency to own more than to rent; which considered as a primary indicator for gentrification (Move from Rental  
 
 
 
 Figure 2, Population growth and the Number of families in Elgamalia and Heliopolis between 1976 and 2017 (2017 
census was estimated from the Cairo statistical data) Source: CAPMAS Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006, 2017 for Cairo  
 
Figure 3, Number of Buildings according to Egyptian owner nationality in Elgamalia and Heliopolis between 1986 and 
2006, with a comparison to the Number of Units built per year in Cairo between 1950 and 1990.  Source: CAPMAS 
Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006 for Cairo  
 
Figure 4, Number of Buildings according to owner’s nationality from Arabs and other countries; in Elgamalia and 
Heliopolis between 1986 and 2006 . Source: CAPMAS Census of 1986, 1996, 2006 for Cairo  

Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 8                                                                                                                                                                                 Tenure to Homeownership). Even though, in Elgamalia the rented apartments are triple the owned apartments which is normal by old and historic neighborhoods due to the old rent contracts which is slightly changing recently, for rent from 82 % to 75 %; due to the new-built buildings which goes much slower than in Heliopolis, this indicates that there is a strong tendency for gentrification to take place. In Heliopolis the owned apartments increased rapidly from 10 % to 43 %, which indicates the rapid change in the neighborhood, but still the high percentage of rented apartments shows that gentrification takes place. Thus, displacement takes place much faster in Heliopolis more than Elgamalia case study. One of the leading indicators of gentrification, is high rates of renters (see Kennedy and Leonard, 2001) which is clearly exists in both cases.  
 So far, the number of residential units decreased from 34,832 to 13,707 units in Elgamalia, which means the neighborhood lost 60 % of its residential units to other uses mainly services use and more ease of access to job centers (leading indicators of gentrification). While the number of residential units increased from 24,445 to 34,766 and decreased slightly in the last two decades to 33,886 units in Heliopolis. Generally, the high percentage of rented apartments are converted to other use than residential, that is mentioned in details in the distribution of the economic activities and professions later in this research. 
 The housing types in Elgamalia categorized between houses and apartment houses with no existence of villa type of residence. As the percentage of apartment houses increased from 31 % in 1986 to 42 % in 2006, due to the need of housing with the tendency to have denser neighborhood, with the loss of houses. Which may indicate the openness of the neighbored for external new comers. The same almost happened in Heliopolis as the percentage of apartment houses increased from 57 % in 1986 to 68 % in 1996 and stabilized to reach 69 % in 2006, with a steadily loss in villas each five year around 1-2 % are demolished and converted to apartment houses. Thus, the real estate and contracting businesses flourish, by which the 12 % increase in apartment houses are faced by 3 % decrease in villas and 9 % decrease in houses, which means every 1 % of turned down villas faced by 1 % newly built apartment houses, which in numbers of housing types each turned down villa or house a 1.6 apartment house is built.    
Figure 5, Percentage of owned and rented apartments in Elgamalia and Heliopolis between 1976 and 2006 . Source: 
CAPMAS Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006 for Cairo  
 
Figure 6, Number of Residential units and Occupancy Rate per room in Elgamalia and Heliopolis between 1976 and 
2006. Source: CAPMAS Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006 for Cairo  
 
Figure 7, Percentage of Housing types in Elgamalia and Heliopolis between 1986 and 2006  
Source: CAPMAS Census of 1986, 1996, 2006 for Cairo  

Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 9                                                                                                                                                                                 7.3. Socio-cultural Analysis The socio-cultural analysis dealt with the residents and outsiders to realize the behavior, traditions, and habits of the case studies users and residents as well. By interviewing, the interviewees seemed to be open and welcoming in Heliopolis more than in Elgamalia case study, maybe due to the openness and exposure of the neighborhood to visitors and residents who belong to different backgrounds. The reply of residents to questions related to buildings which have architecture values and had been sabotaged were worried and panicky sometimes. As they seemed conservative towards some social behavior of visitors who tend to misuse the calm environment that Heliopolis used to enjoy which nowadays changed to noisy, harshness and sometimes vulgarity. As education considered a vital indicator for the neighborhood’s development and level of residents who are the gentrifiers of the case studies. The socio-cultural analysis represents the educational level and status of the residents, culture, habits and behavior. The social behavior, culture and habits were identified from the interviews which have been conducted in previous researches and summarized here (Shetawy et. al., 2015). As an indicator for the change in cultural identity and habits in Elgamalia and Heliopolis respectively, what was mentioned by one of the interviewees that "I live here for almost 45 years, I like this place so much this is my home, I do not like to move from here, here are many mosques, my mosque is 20 meters far from my house, I can practice my religion everyday" local resident 2015. And in Heliopolis “Heliopolis witnessed a wave of Ruralization due to the migration of inhabitants from delta villages to Cairo in general and Heliopolis in specific, that changed the traditions and daily life of what I used to see in my street adding to that the new inhabitants who arrived to Heliopolis during the last two decades” Local resident and expert in Architecture 2017.   The following graphs show the educational status in both case studies, for the period between 1976 and 2006.  In Elgamalia, there is a noticeable increase of the percentage of residents with university degrees, as they increased from 1.5 % in 1976 to 11.4 % in 2006, which means they have been eight times more than in 1976. Moreover, the percentage of residents who has only elementary education has disappeared from 10.1 % in 1976 to only 0.3 % in 2006. Also with decrease in illiterates from 48% to only 27 %, during the same period. Generally, the residents of Elgamalia are becoming more educated than before.   
 In Heliopolis, there is a noticeable increase of the percentage of residents with university degrees, as they increased from 18.1 % in 1976 to almost 49 % in 2006, which means they have been 2.7 times more than in 1976. Also with decrease in illiterates from 14.8 % to only 6.3 %, during the same period. Moreover, the percentage of residents who has only elementary education has disappeared from 12.7 % in 1976 to only 0.3 % in 2006. Generally, the residents of Heliopolis are becoming more educated than before, and they are more educated in general than in Elgamalia.  
  
Figure 8, Educational Status in Elgamalia between 1976 and 2006. Source: CAPMAS Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006 
for Cairo   
Figure 9, Educational Status in Heliopolis between 1976 and 2006. Source: CAPMAS Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006 
for Cairo  

Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 10                                                                                                                                                                                 7.4. Economic Analysis The economic analysis shows the different economic sectors and activities that each case study has, regarding the residents who are living in Elgamalia and Heliopolis. The economic activities indicate the main identity of the community who is living in the case study, while the professional activities indicate the real professions that the residents really work with. Accordingly, in Elgamalia, the economic activities are depending on three main sectors, industrial, trading and hospitality and services, then construction and transportation comes later. The main three sectors, represent around 85 % of the economic activities. Even there is a gradual stable decrease in industrial activities from 35 % in 1976 to 26 % in 2006, while trading increased from 27 % in 1976 to 35 % in 2006, and services increased generally from 25 % in 1976 to 31 % in 2006 with a noticeable increase in 1986 with booming open-door policy in the beginning of the 80’s. moreover, construction activities has been decreased from 8 % in 1976 to 4.5% then increased to reach 6.4 % in 1996 then decreased again to reach 4.1 % in 2006. This indicates the instability of construction activities due to the supply and demand of the real estate market. Thus, the Elgamalia neighborhood leading sector is the trading and hospitality then comes the services, this is due to the increased number of commercial activities and stores for textile companies.    On the other hand, Heliopolis, leading activities are services which only represents more than 55 % of the economic activities alone, in the last four decades. With a noticeable increase in trading and hospitality activities which increased from 13 % in 1976 to reach 23 % in 2006. Also with a slight decrease in the industrial activities to be 9.8 in 2006 from 12 % in 1976. Thus, the community in Heliopolis is a community of services, which maybe obvious with the change from residential to commercial, leisure and administrative activities. Thus, changing in income showing the presence of secondary indicator of gentrification.  
 The distribution of professions in Elgamalia and Heliopolis indicates the need to professions according to the mentioned activities. So far, Elgamalia’s boom for need of factory workers and machine operators in the 1976 which represented 47 % soon decreased to 35 % in 1986 and then to 33 % in 2006, also with another boom in construction workers in 1986 from 6 % in 1976 to 22 % in 1986. This was due to the shift from an industrial country to a country relying on segmented sectors such as tourism, services, administration and finance, by which the need to technicians and scientific professional, and service workers in much more efficient than working in a factory. Even that in Heliopolis, the need for legislators, seniors, and professional technicians is more obvious as it increased from 36 % in 1976 to reach 57 % in 2006, accompanied by a slight increase in services professions and construction workers. Therefore, the public workforce in Elgamalia decreased from 29 % in 1986 to 22 % in 2006, and in Heliopolis from 44 % to 31 % within the same period, thus giving more opportunities to private national and international investments and real estate to flow.  
   Figure 10, Percentage of Economic Activities distribution; in Elgamalia and Heliopolis between 1976 and 2006 . 
Source: CAPMAS Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006 for Cairo  
 Figure 11, Percentage of Professions distribution; in Elgamalia and Heliopolis between 1976 and 2006.  
Source: CAPMAS Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006 for Cairo  

Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 11                                                                                                                                                                                 7.5. Physical Analysis Exploring the typology of both cases, exploration helps to understand and expect the locations which may be exposed to near gentrification process. Physical analysis which was done by previous research to have a whole overview of the gentrification process in the case studies area, a total area of 46,5253 square meters (111 Fadden) in the Historic City of Cairo, Elgamalia case study, and 20,9122 square meters (50 Fadden) in Elkorba, Heliopolis case study. The Geographic Information System (ARC GIS) was used for analyzing the data for land uses, heights, conditions, and building materials of buildings on both case studies. Accordingly, the land use for the ground floor of the Historic Cairo, showed that 56.6 % of the built-up area is used for commercial purposes while in Elkorba district it was 50.4 % for the same purposes. Then comes the residential use with 13.4 % and 24.5 % in Historic Cairo and Elkorba, respectively. In the third place, industrial and crafts use with 10.5 % in Historic Cairo and leisure activities and entertainment uses with 7.9 % in Elkorba.   
 Moreover, the survey showed that the heights of buildings in Elkorba are more than in Historic Cairo. Historic Cairo’s buildings ranged between 9 to 13 floors represented 1.1 % only while in Elkorba reached 5.8 % of the buildings. Such difference in height range is due to the wider range of streets in Elkorba more than in Historic Cairo, thus allowed more height allowance. While the percentage of buildings between 1 and 2 floors are almost the same in both case studies, 50.8 % and 49.2 %. The building structure system of Historic Cairo ranged between concrete skeleton, bearing walls, and light structured as 60.4 % of the buildings are built with reinforced concrete while, on the other hand 62 % in Elkorba. Bearing walls represented almost the same percentage in both cases, 39 % and 38 % in Historic Cairo and Elkorba respectively. This is due to the historical background of both cases as the common building systems which allow more formation and ornaments is using bearing walls regardless to the time while the modern structure tend to use concrete skeletons. Meanwhile, more focus and importance have been given to Heliopolis, because the medium conditions of buildings reached 43.4 % in Historic Cairo while only 7.2 % in Elkorba. Even more, partly destroyed and bad condition buildings 6.9 % and 0.5 % can be found in Historic Cairo, while in Elkorba this is not the case.    
Figure 12, Percentage of Public and private sectors; in Elgamalia and Heliopolis between 1986 and 2006.  Source: 
CAPMAS Census of 1976, 1986, 1996, 2006 for Cairo  
 
Figure 13, Percentage of Ground Floor uses; in Historic Cairo and Elkorba. Source: The researcher depending on survey 
data made in 2015 & 2017.  
 
Figure 14, Heights, Percentage of Heights, Building Materials and Conditions of Buildings in Historic Cairo  and Elkorba . 
Source:  The researcher depending on survey data made in 2015 & 2017.  

Muhammad Eldaidamony, Abeer Elshater, Ahmed Shetawy, Yehya Serag / Proceedings of Science and Technolgy 
pg. 12                                                                                                                                                                                 8. Concluded Remarks  It is essential to mention that the researcher is not pro or against gentrification rather than trying to legitimate a process which may cause urban planning disasters in case of lack of a comprehensive methodology. Moreover, according to the demographic, housing circumstances, socio-cultural, economic, and physical analysis, it was found that both case studies are highly exposed to gentrification process, even that gentrification is processing much faster in Heliopolis due to the more attention given to it, as during the research is written the Merry land garden is going to open in the next few months after it has been regenerated with modern full furnished landscape, which needs more research to evaluate and understand the effect of it on the ongoing gentrification process. The main gentrifiers type in Heliopolis are different than in Historic Cairo. In Historic Fatimid Cairo the main gentrifiers are merchants, restaurants and café owners, and traders, due to the uses and activities which already in high demand for investors. While in Heliopolis, the main gentrifiers are investors interested in financial, leisure and entertaining activities, also young families with one or two children. Elgamalia is lead by commercial gentrification due to the increased need and demand for commercial uses, while in Heliopolis is lead by residential gentrification due to the increased need and demand for hosuing use.  Gentrification in Egypt is processing in a different way than the core cities. Firstly, noone know about the term “gentrificatio” even there is no any translation which to the Arabic language except the insight of Muhammad Eldaidamony (2017) to translate the term to Arabic (see also: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/استطباقcite_note-2). Elwakil Shafak (2015) argued that the term is much related to “replacement”, while as gentrification positive and negative consequences differ from replacement. Thus, noone resist the gentrification process, as far as its unknown, inhabitants do not have the opportunity to struggle against it. Secondly, on economic basis, gentrification is a very powerful tool to increase the income of the gentrification mediators and stakeholders, such as local businesses, contractors, and developers. Thirdly, gentrification is happeneing gradually and slowly in Cairo, thus its important to understand the procees to proclaim and legalize it, to get as much positive consequences and avoid the negative ones; by providing alternatives to the displaced inhabitants.  Moreover gentrifiction can be defined in the context of Egypt as “it’s a process that pushs economic activities, to benefit, on one hand the stakeholders; new comers, policy makers, investors; by purchasing renewed properties to enjoy the better quality of life in a livable urban environment. On the other hand, the mediators who get better direct job opportunities and increasing their income, working in a better quality neighborhoods, and indirect complementary job opportunities, such as small investors, workers and local contractors. All this happens secretly (behnd the scenes) and hidding under the umbrella of other urban models (regenertion, renewal, rehabilitation, etc.) beyond gentrification, regarless to displaced population. While the displaced population tend to hide and accommodate with the new urban life, which explains the slowness of gentrification”.  For further research purposes, more analysis needed to identify the different types of gentrifiers and the causes for gentrification. Also, psychological analysis should have been taken into consideration concerning murder and crime rates, and segregation factors. So far, social and cultural analysis needs more research from socialists and geographers to identify the types of specific habits and traditions changes. Geographic Information System as a tool for analysis and to deduce gentrification locations is considered being useful and fruitful, and more are to be expected from the analysis tools it has, in further research. Finally, as gentrification considered before being a haphazard process in some cases, it could be managed and controlled for the benefits of the inhabitants by this will overcome and decrease displacement and social segregation, of gentrification and maximize the benefiting of its positive consequences, improved urban life and newly investments and prospered economic activities.   Finally, the researcher, tried to differentiate between different urban models and expressions used in urban planning and projects, as gentrification is a different approach which needs more case studies to be involved to draw a full map to its consequences in Egypt. The two new added geographies of gentrification, historical-tourism gentrification and real estate / contracting gentrification will open further research fields and riches the literature of gentrification in the future. Beside Gentrification positive consequences it lacks quality and considering conservation and cultural differences. If there is no way of gentrification to happen so it has to go hand in hand with conservation in order to conserve the historical buildings.  