Cities 130 (2022) 103881
Available online 1 August 2022
0264-2751/© 2022 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Retheorizing state-led gentrification and minority displacement in the 
Global South-East 
Yael Shmaryahu-Yeshurun 
Department of Sociology, University of California San Diego, United States of America   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Gentrification 
Nationalism 
Global South-East 
Ethnicity 
Displacement 
Contested cities ABSTRACT  
Studies on gentrification emphasize the roles of the state and local authorities in promoting a process leading to 
displacement of lower-income populations, mostly ethnic and racial minorities. Such studies, mostly from the 
global North, present displacement as an unintentional outcome of class, racial, and ethnic intersection. Thus, the 
ethno-national and racial mechanisms underlying state-led gentrification are left unarticulated. The current 
research, studying from the southeastern perspective, challenges this narrative. I argue that in a state of eth-
nonational conflict, gentrification in contested cities may serve as an institutional tool for achieving territorial 
control and strengthening demographic dominancy of the majority. Based on in-depth interviews and docu-
mentary analysis, this study analyzes the institutional mechanisms that shape gentrification in contested cities, 
leading to displacement of minorities on an ethnonational and class basis. In doing so, this research outlines the 
policy drivers, their implications, and the resistance of the minority residents.   
1.Introduction 
Over the last two decades, gentrification studies have moved beyond 
the Anglo-Saxon academic sphere. Smith (2002) argues that gentrifica -
tion is no longer an urban strategy found only in the Global North, but 
has become a truly globalized process that has “densely connected into 
the circuits of global capital and cultural circulation ” (p. 427). Seen as a 
method to increase capital accumulation, the “global ” (Smith, 2002 ) or 
“planetary ” (Lees et al., 2016 ) reach of gentrification gained popularity 
worldwide. As a result, multiple studies of globalized gentrification 
processes in cities emerged in developing countries (Betancur, 2014 ; 
L´opez-Morales, 2015 ; Shin & L´opez-Morales, 2018 ; Waley, 2016 ). 
Studies have highlighted gentrification as a product of global neoliber -
alism (Lees et al., 2016 ; Slater, 2017 ). By “neoliberalism ” I mean the 
“hypermarketed style of governance (i.e. government through and by 
the market) that denigrates collective consumption and institutions. It is 
also an ideological fetishization of pure, perfect markets as superior 
allocative mechanisms for the distribution of public resources ” (Weber, 
2002 : 520). 
However, the perspective of the Global North, much of which reflects 
Western, Euro-American opinions, does not always adequately depict 
gentrification in the Global South. Specifically, it neglects the possibility 
that in other geographical contexts, gentrification is more than a 
neoliberal or economic process. In such cases, it may serve as a governmental tool for achieving territorial control and strengthening 
the national presence. In other words, minority displacement is not 
simply an unintentional side effect of economic disadvantage inter-
secting with ethnicity and race; instead, this displacement is the product 
of a nation-state's territorialization projects. Because such subtleties are 
not examined in the dominant literature, the intentional, ethnonational, 
and racial mechanisms of state-led gentrification have not been properly 
identified. 
The geographic particularity of the Global South has given rise to a 
critique regarding the very use of the term “gentrification ” outside the 
Global North context. Scholars of the post-colonial comparativist 
approach advocate for theory construction from different places at 
different times, without the act of “theory traveling ” (Maloutas, 2012 ). 
This is because the latter, they claim, acts as a major imposition of 
knowledge, a colonial exertion of intellectual power that must be de-
tached from current urban studies. 
Therefore, scholars have described displacement resulting from 
urban policy in the Global South/Southeast using terms such as “urban 
ethnocracy ” (Yacobi, 2009 ), “settler colonialism ” (Shafir, 1989 ), “neo-
liberalized settler colonialism ” (Tomiak, 2017 ), and “neocolonial city” 
and “gray spacing ” (Porter & Yiftachel, 2017 ). In this way, I argue, the 
disconnect between the two bodies of knowledge intensifies, namely the 
literature on nation-building projects, ethnocracy, and colonialism 
versus literature on gentrification. Thus, there remains obscure the 
E-mail address: Yael@ucsd.edu .  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Cities 
journal homepage: www.elsevi er.com/loc ate/cities 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2022.103881 
Received 22 July 2021; Received in revised form 13 July 2022; Accepted 21 July 2022   
Cities 130 (2022) 103881
2foundations and mechanisms of institutional racism, which allow the 
commodification of space as well as the devaluation and dispossession of 
people via gentrification (Kent-Stoll, 2020 ; Ellis-Young, 2022 ). 
While I agree that we should avoid hastily adopting and “traveling ” 
the concept of gentrification into the Global South, neither can we 
completely abandon knowledge on these types of processes as we move 
across contexts. As L´opez-Morales (2015) claims, the call to “unlearn ” 
what we already know about gentrification may unnecessarily eliminate 
some of the literature's most critical discussions, ones that help us 
confront the injustices of capitalism through shared spaces of debate. 
The generalization of extant cases, often varied under the same theo-
retical framework, are in fact the bread and butter of social scientists. 
They allow us to apply knowledge from one geographical context to 
another. Therefore, I argue that there is intellectual value in creating 
generic theoretical categories cutting across boundaries. 
From this position, I will adopt Clark's (2005) generic definition of 
gentrification to describe the phenomenon under study: 
A process involving a change in the population of land-users such 
that the new users are of a higher socio-economic status than the 
previous users, together with an associated change in the built 
environment through a reinvestment in fixed capital. …It does not 
matter where, it does not matter when. 
(p. 258) 
I will further add to this definition that it does not matter why. 
I will also implement Valle's (2021) approach to studying gentrifi -
cation in the Global South, which (a) suggests both elastic and focused 
perspectives, (b) eliminates unnecessary qualifiers, and (c) allows for 
incorporation of individual cases' specificities as well as a judicious 
interrogation of shared relations across spaces. I will investigate a 
particular type of state-led gentrification in contested Israeli cities 
beyond the economic angles. I hope to avoid assuming an “imitative 
urbanism ” (Lees, 2012 ) or a diffusionist model with gentrification 
originating in the “West ” and moving to the “East” and “South ” 
(Betancur, 2014 ; Lees et al., 2016 ; L´opez-Morales, 2015 ). 
Since the late 1960s, the state of Israel has encouraged settlement of 
young middle-class Jewish populations organized in Zionist associations 
into disadvantaged neighborhoods, specifically in Israel's socioeconomic 
periphery and contested cities. Members of these associations, named 
Garin Torani and Ayalim, are driven by both a Zionist and socioeco -
nomic agenda. They participate in activities that supposedly strengthen 
the social fabric of their local communities and Judaize these cities. 
Following recent calls to analyze the various forms and natures of 
gentrification outside the context of the Global North (Lees et al., 2016 ; 
Shin & L´opez-Morales, 2018 ), and in light of the disconnect among 
literature on gentrification theory and settler colonialism, ethnocracy, 
and nation-building (Ellis-Young, 2022 ; Kent-Stoll, 2020 ), this study 
will demonstrate how in the context of ethnonational conflict, the 
capitalist tool of gentrification serves as a more subtle form of territorial 
control. 
Studying this phenomenon from a southeastern perspective (Yifta-
chel, 2020 ), I will map five institutional mechanisms that promote 
gentrification. In doing so, I will reveal the motives of the policy, 
identifying in what way gentrification leads to minority displacement 
and how the latter resist it. The methodological premise is that there are 
institutional mechanisms which represent the deliberate and systematic 
policy operating beyond the local context; these mechanisms can only be 
revealed through the meticulous examination of consistent patterns 
between different urban and organizational arenas. This gentrification 
policy and its mechanisms will be conceptualized as a phenomenon of 
“state-led ethno-gentrification, ” an extension of the term “ethno- 
gentrification ” suggested by Monterescu (2015) . 
Conceptualizing state-led ethno-gentrification, the study will expand 
the gentrification literature to a context outside the Global North while 
simultaneously emphasizing its particularity. This will help me sub-
stantiate two arguments. First, I argue that in contemporary cities and specifically in the context of ethnonational conflicts between majority 
and minority populations, gentrification cannot be investigated as a 
purely economic process, detached from ethnonational, racial and po-
litical agendas. I call on gentrification scholars worldwide, especially 
those in areas inhabited by ethnic/racial minorities and indigenous 
populations, not to assume that gentrification serves as an institutional 
tool only for economic purposes, therefore causing an unintentional 
byproduct of displaced minorities. Rather, such scholars should criti-
cally examine the policy motivations for promoting gentrification. 
Accordingly, it is critical to explore the deliberate covert and overt 
mechanisms of minority displacement beyond the prevailing assump -
tion that displacement is a natural outcome of economic marginaliza -
tion. My exploration of gentrification's mechanisms in this study is 
intended to provide an infrastructure for identifying similar and dis-
similar mechanisms in other localities. Second, I argue that not every 
urban policy that leads to minority displacement is purely colonialism; 
instead, as I demonstrate below, it may involve economic opportunities 
and interests as well as capitalist mechanisms that enable minority 
displacement. It is therefore crucial to use the terms and concepts of 
urban economics literature, such as “gentrification, ” to properly un-
derstand the mechanism of minority displacement. In doing so, the study 
will contribute to the connection between gentrification theory and 
literature on settler colonialism, ethnocracy, and nation-state projects. 
2.A side effect of state-led gentrification: minority displacement 
in the Global North 
The literature on gentrification has developed significantly over the 
years. While initial studies describe gentrification as neighborhood 
change driven by economic interests and individual choices, later 
studies highlight the state as a key player in promoting the process 
(Smith, 2002 ). In addition, they indicate not only class-based displace -
ment following gentrification but also a displacement of ethnic and 
racial minorities (Goetz, 2011 ). 
In the Global North, racial or ethnic displacement is often explained 
as a by-product of economic disadvantage that happens to intersect with 
ethnicity and race, as opposed to resulting from intentionally racist 
policies. Studies explain that Black, Latinx, and indigenous populations 
are often overrepresented in lower-income groups and are likely to live 
in impoverished urban areas that act as potential state-led gentrification 
sites. Therefore, they are disproportionally vulnerable to displacement 
pressures (Goetz, 2011 ; Wyly & Hammel, 2004 ). 
Neil Smith's (1996) early conceptualization of the “urban frontier ” 
and the “revanchist city” poses more recognition of gentrification's racist 
and colonial dimension. As he demonstrated, both 19th-century Amer -
ican colonialism and gentrification in New York City during the 1980s 
and '90s received similar justifications via the colonial frontier myth, 
leading to the displacement of indigenous, Black, and Latinx populations 
from these spaces. While this major work does offer a sharp analysis of 
the political economy of gentrification, it tends to reduce the colonial 
element to a metaphor for class. 
Even so, in the last decade, an evolving body of knowledge has 
moved away from a class-reductionist lens to a more centralized focus 
on policymakers' rhetoric regarding race and ethnicity when promoting 
gentrification. In Rotterdam (Uitermark et al., 2007 ) an ethnic minority 
concentration is depicted as damaging to the area's reputation, causing 
social problems. This narrative encourages and legitimizes gentrifica -
tion policy. Mele (2017) found that the white Republican political class 
in Chester, Pennsylvania racialized the inner city, advertising it as un-
worthy of investment in order to promote decline of the majority Black 
population in the 1970s and '80s. Later, these politicians employed 
racial discourse to justify gentrification as a necessary means in dealing 
with people of color who supposedly inhibited development. 
Recent scholarship has further emphasized the dimensions of racism 
and colonialism in shaping urban space. Settler colonial rationalities 
were articulated in Detroit when the local government prepared a Y. Shmaryahu-Yeshurun                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cities 130 (2022) 103881
3postindustrial urban frontier for resettlement and reinvestment 
(Safransky, 2014 ). Moreover, Addie and Fraser (2019) demonstrated 
how through gentrification in Cincinnati, Ohio, settler colonialism has 
fundamentally redefined the social fabric of the urban space and pa-
thologized Black populations as causing the neighborhood's economic 
decline. Together, these cases show that settler colonialism in the Global 
North is far from dormant. The settlers' desire for the frontier —and the 
urban and governing institutions that produce it—limits the assumption 
that the drivers of gentrification are purely neoliberal or economic in 
orientation. 
3.The visible hand of state-led gentrification: a view of the 
Global South 
Lees's (2012, p. 164) calls to “decolonize the gentrification literature 
from Euro-American perspectives ” have contributed to the incorpora -
tion of global southern countries into mainstream gentrification 
research. Indeed, Lees et al. (2016) encourage researchers to undertake 
fresh debate on the control and privatization of places that do not follow 
the Western conception of a democratic public space. As Betancur 
(2014) suggested, when analyzing gentrification outside the context of 
the Global North, one should address both the broader economic forces 
and the local political regimes. It is also crucial to analyze the broader 
modes of political-economic development, such as regime shifts, since 
differing processes of spatial restructuring have fostered differing pro-
cesses of gentrification. 
While in the West increased state participation in gentrification has 
been associated with a turn towards neoliberalism, in the Global South, 
the neoliberal and authoritarian state is not only allowing but stimu -
lating the process. It accomplishes this through the commodification and 
privatization of land and extensive forced expulsion of residents in what 
has been described as “mega-displacement ” (Lees et al., 2016 ; L´opez- 
Morales, 2015 ; L´opez-Morales et al., 2021 ). Alongside these authori -
tarian states, political elites play a pivotal role in reimagining city- 
making in the Global South, deciding how resources are to be allo-
cated in terms of production and consumption. We see an example of 
this is Abu Dhabi and Lebanon (Shin & L´opez-Morales, 2018 ). 
Thus, in many cases, gentrification in the Global South has become a 
political process involving active discrimination towards ethnic minor -
ities. For example, the Indian government's Slum Rehabilitation Scheme 
(SRS) in Mumbai in the late 1990s led to massive demolishing of 
informal structures, as well as eviction and homelessness of North In-
dians and Muslims. Xenophobic campaigns by the local political party, 
Shiv Sena, further aggravated conditions of evictees (Doshi, 2013 ). 
Similarly, in Brazil, existing ethnic oppressions were intensified through 
a series of tactics, including military occupation and policing of the fa-
velas (slums), globalizing mega-events, and large-scale state-led urban 
development projects (Lees et al., 2016 ; L´opez-Morales et al., 2021 ). 
Furthermore, Krijnen and De Beukelaer (2015) argue that a post- 
colonial perspective should look beyond the “usual suspects ” of Euro- 
American geography and consider the role of war and conflict in 
displacement and creating rent gaps in the Global South. In their study 
on Beirut, they claim that the crises of conflict and war have provided 
the opportunity for spatial fixes. Reduction in unemployment, economic 
growth, and increase in housing prices are linked to post-war recon -
struction and redevelopment. These issues are also identified as drivers 
of state-led gentrification in Belfast (Murtagh, 2011 ), Sarajevo, and 
Herzegovina (Pobric & Robinson, 2019 ). War zones have caused refugee 
concentrations in various cities such as Tarlabas ¸ı in Istanbul, which 
subsequently encouraged state-led gentrification as a tool to dislocate 
refugees, rehabilitate the stigmatized area, and revive national heritage 
(Tsavdaroglou, 2020 ). 4.State-led gentrification and urban ethnocracy: a lens from 
Israel 
Studies on spatial policy in Israel have highlighted the state's eth-
nonational motivations to build the Jewish nation-state during the 
conflict between Arabs and Jews. This policy, which promotes hierar -
chies between Arabs and Jews, has been described as “ethnocracy ” 
(Yiftachel, 1997 ) and “settler colonialism ” (Shafir, 1989 ). Similarly, in 
Israel's contested cities, the “urban ethnocracy ” (Yacobi, 2009 ) pro-
moted Judaization of the space and segregation between Jews and 
Arabs. 
Seventy years after the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, the Israeli contested 
cities of Lydda, Jaffa and Acre represent well the state's ethnonational 
motivations behind the urban Judaization. These cities were the modern 
urban centers of Mandatory Palestine and officially transformed into 
Jewish cities during the first years of Israeli statehood. The majority of 
Arabs there had escaped or was expelled during the war. The state seized 
Arab land and property through the Absentee Property Law (1950) , 
some of which was used later for public housing. Simultaneously, the 
state settled these cities with mass numbers of Jewish immigrants and 
refugees from Europe and the Middle East (Monterescu, 2015 ). In Lydda, 
located in central Israel, 30 % of the 80,931 residents are Arabs. In Jaffa, 
also in the center, 31 % of its 60,000 residents are Arabs. In the northern 
district, the city of Acre has about 49,500 residents, 33 % of whom are 
Arabs (Central Bureau of Statistics, 2020 ).1 These cities have suffered 
long-term neglect, urban decline, and disinvestment, which preceded 
and intensified during gentrification. Despite new development, they 
are still rated low in the socioeconomic rating of the CBS.2 This is 
especially true for Arabs, who suffer from poor housing conditions, low 
socioeconomic status and housing policy discrimination (Yacobi, 2009 ), 
though they are highly supported by welfare services (Central Bureau of 
Statistics, 2021 ). 
Although scholars have emphasized the ethnocratic and colonial 
aspects of spatial policy in Israel, only a few studies have addressed 
specifically the gentrification process and its connection to displacement 
of the Arab minority. Monterescu (2015) used the term “ethno-gentri -
fication ” to highlight how Jewish gentrifiers in Jaffa cause Arab mi-
nority displacement. Zaban (2016) showed ethnonational stratification 
as well as class inequalities between Arabs and Jews, resulting in 
gentrification in Jerusalem. In proposing the term “state-led ethno- 
gentrification, ” Shmaryahu-Yeshurun and Ben-Porat (2020) argued that 
though gentrification in Acre is presented as an economic process 
beneficial to all, the state both promoted and concealed national control 
and ethnonational domination in the territory. Gentrification in Acre 
also redefined the religious character of the city, in what Luz (2022) 
described as “religious gentrification. ” 
Despite these studies' contributing significantly to our understanding 
of the ethnonational context of state-led gentrification, to date only in-
dividual case studies have been presented without providing compre -
hensive mapping of the consistent institutional mechanisms that shape 
gentrification and lead to minority displacement. The research below is 
designed to help create such a framework. 
1 Despite Arab displacement from one neighborhood to another in the same 
city, and even to outside the cities, over the last twenty years there has been a 
moderate increase in the relative and absolute proportion of the Arab popula -
tion. This increase can be explained as the result of a mass migration of Jewish 
populations out of these cities, a natural increase in Arab populations, and a low 
rate of migration of Arabs into city limits.  
2 There are no CBS data regarding Jaffa as one urban entity, since it is 
calculated together with Tel Aviv. However, from income level data, public 
housing rates and supported welfare rates, one can learn about the low socio -
economic rate of Jaffa residents (Monterescu, 2015 ). Y. Shmaryahu-Yeshurun                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cities 130 (2022) 103881
45.Methods 
I conducted this study using the qualitative method of case studies 
(Yin, 2009 ) of two settlement associations: Garin Torani and Ayalim. 
The studies occurred in three urban arenas: Lydda (Lod), Jaffa and Acre 
(Akko). The study included 82 semi-structured, in-depth interviews. In 
terms of demographics, 35 interviewees were newcomers and founders 
of settlement organizations, 30 were local Arab residents, and 17 were 
local policymakers from the cities of Lydda, Jaffa3 and Acre. Most of the 
interviews were conducted between 2017 and 2019 and some in 2021. 
71 interviews were face-to-face meetings and 11 occurred by phone. The 
sampling strategy included snowball sampling to identify and reach 
influential people involved in the processes studied. Lasting between 
thirty and ninety minutes, all interviews were audiotaped and tran-
scribed. Interviewees' names have been changed for confidentiality. 
In addition, I analyzed 520 documents, including government policy 
documents (Knesset committee protocols, laws, work plans of govern -
ment ministries, queries, judgments, budget documents, government 
resolutions, calls for support for Garin Torani members, tenders, etc.), 
municipal policy documents (planning documents, annual reports, ten-
ders, outline plans, etc.), newcomers' organization documents (annual 
plans, vision documents, budget, videos, etc.), and articles from the local 
and national press and online forums. 
6.The newcomers: Zionist NGOs in the role of ethno- 
gentrification 
Garin Torani is a group of middle-class Jewish religious families, 
mostly young and educated as part of the “creative class. ” (Florida, 
2002 ). These families purchase apartments and move in disadvantaged 
neighborhoods to volunteer with disadvantaged populations, Judaize 
space, and disseminate Zionist and religious ideology among the general 
population. The first Garin Torani group was established in the late 
1960s. Today, there are over 80 similar initiatives scattered around the 
country (Reichner, 2013 ). The settlement of Garin Torani in contested 
cities specifically occurred from the 1990s. In Lydda, the Garin Torani 
was founded in 1994 and is the largest settlement in Israel with about 
one thousand families. They live mainly in the neighborhoods of Ramat 
Elyashiv, Neve Zeit, Neve Nof, and Ramat Eshkol, as well as Ramet and 
Givat HaZeitim. Acre's Garin Torani was founded in 1997 and has about 
200 families living primarily in the religious neighborhood of Neot 
Eliyahu and in the north of the city. The Garin Torani in Jaffa was 
established in 2007, spreading in the city's neighborhoods, mainly in the 
Givat Ha'aliya neighborhood, Ajami, Lev Jaffa and Jaffa Areas C and D. 
The Ayalim movement was established in 2002 to strengthen Zionist 
settlement and encourage social involvement in disadvantaged neigh -
borhoods, mostly in the Negev and Galilee but also in Lydda. Ayalim 
implements its mission by establishing student villages and inhabiting 
public housing apartments for both its religious and secular student 
members. Ayalim founded 15 villages and eight alumni groups, reaching 
a membership of more than 1200 students (Ayalim, n.d.). In 2007, 
Ayalim Student Village was founded in Old Acre, populating 20 mem-
bers. In Lydda, two Ayalim complexes populate about 140 members. The 
first complex was established in 2011 in the city center on Herzl Street 
for about 60 students. The second one was founded in 2013 and popu -
lated about 80 members. As for Jaffa, Ayalim does not operate there. 
Ethno-gentrification, as I describe below, is state-led and facilitates a 
coalition of state actors, state-owned public housing companies, local 
municipalities, and Zionist associations. It is accomplished by five major 
mechanisms directed at encouraging Jewish settlers to inhabit contested 
cities. The process, as I will show, is met by local Arab residents who feel 
threatened by ethno-gentrification and are prone to displacement. 7.Five institutional mechanisms of ethno-gentrification 
7.1. Establishment of new neighborhoods for settlement associations 
Establishing neighborhoods for middle-class religious Jewish pop-
ulations in disadvantaged spaces is a key institutional mechanism pro-
moting ethno-gentrification in Israeli contested cities. This is 
implemented through allocating land and granting building rights in 
public land to settlement associations that have a goal to populate 
neighborhoods. 
In Lydda, the Ramat Elyashiv neighborhood was inaugurated in 
2004, populated two years later, and as of 2015, the neighborhood has 
about 500 middle-class families (see Figs. 1 and 2). Ramat Elyashiv was 
motivated both by economic goals and incentives, as in many other 
gentrification cases, and an ethnonational agenda, unique to this case. 
Regarding economic process, the neighborhood was established in a 
neglected area characterized by crime and drugs. Constructing the 
neighborhood involved evicting local residents (who were living there 
illegally) after providing them financial compensation. They were 
replaced by middle-class residents who purchased the new apartments. 
Construction of the new neighborhood has led to a significant rise in real 
estate value in the area over the years,4 turning it into one of the most 
popular neighborhoods in the city among the middle-class, national 
religious sector in Israel. 
However, it was also motivated by and promoted Judaization of 
Lydda in several ways. First, it was deliberately placed as the buffer 
point between the northern Arab neighborhoods and the southern 
Jewish neighborhoods in order to halt expansion of the Arab sector there 
(Reichner, 2013 ). Second, the evicted local residents were mostly Arabs, 
who relocated to nearby neighborhoods of Kerem al-Tufah, Ramat 
Eshkol and Banit. These. Finally, the neighborhood's residences were 
intended for religious Jews only. 
Fig. 1.Ramat Elyashiv neighborhood, Lydda. 
Note. Photograph taken by the author. 
3 In Jaffa, in contrast to Acre and Lydda, only members of the Garin Torani 
were interviewed since there is no settlement of Ayalim Association in the city. 4 While the Garin Torani purchased the land for 555 NIS (7 NIS or 2.09 USD 
per apartment) and reduced development fees, in 2009 the average price per 
square meter was 7030 NIS (about 800,000 NIS or 238,770 USD per apart -
ment). A decade later in 2021, the price doubled to 16,909 NIS per square 
meter (about 1.6 million NIS or 478,000 USD per apartment). Since its estab -
lishment, the prices of apartments in the neighborhood have been higher than 
the average prices of apartments in the city (data analysis from the Madeleine 
website: https://www.madlan.co.il ). Y. Shmaryahu-Yeshurun                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cities 130 (2022) 103881
5In 2000, founder of Garin Torani recruited the support of then-prime 
minister Ariel Sharon and the Ministry of Housing to create the neigh -
borhood. In 2003, the Israel Lands Administration published a selective 
tender for “religious associations ” to build the neighborhood on an area 
of 5031 square meters, including 76 apartment units in the first stage. 
Garin Torani won the tender, purchasing the land for seven Israeli new 
shekels (a little over 2 USD) per unit and reducing development fees 
(Israel Land Administration, 2003 ). Later in 2007, a second tender was 
issued for the construction of 352 more housing units. The Kardan Real 
Estate Enterprise and Development company won the tender and mar-
keted the apartments to religious Jewish populations. According to the 
description of Yair Revivo, mayor of Lydda, gentrification represents the 
global paradigm for rehabilitating disadvantaged neighborhoods 
through the middle class while incorporating an ethnonational agenda, 
unique to the context of ethnological conflict: 
The members of Garin Torani were a positive bright spot in the 
difficult years of Lydda. They came here when there was a traffic jam 
to leave the city…Young educated couples with children [came] … It 
was a dramatic move that also affected our local education and 
community, causing residents to renew their faith in the city…We 
are not ashamed to raise the Zionist flag and promote the Jewish 
character here … Garin is the most important settlement enterprise 
completed in the country in the last twenty years. They simply saved 
a strategic city in the state of Israel. It is likely that without Garin 
Torani, the migration trend would have continued, and Lydda today 
would be an Arab city that dominates our only airport. 
(Revivo, 2015, in Reichner, 2015 ) 
Similarly, the Garin members mention the economic incentive to buy 
a cheap apartment in the city center, a classic case of gentrification. 
They also cite their motivation to strengthen Lydda's Jewish character. 
As Orit, a Garin Torani member, noted: 
There are some who came just because of the cheap price of the 
apartments … The value of the apartments doubled within a few 
years … Nevertheless, the actual act of living here has its own ide-
ology and value … It is important to Judaize the place … They [the 
Arabs] are not supposed to live here. This is our land. 
State-led gentrification has led to ambivalent feelings among Arab 
residents; while welcoming the economic development and improved 
infrastructure of the city, they are being displaced physically and eth-
nonationally. As Marwan, an Arab resident, recounted: On the one hand, residents say there is an improvement to the city 
because once a population that is caring for the environment and 
public space came, it helped. But on the other hand, it raised housing 
prices and hurt its character … We have conflict because this is a 
nationalist project. 
Arab residents claim that these projects express a policy seeking to 
displace them. As Advocate Khaled a-Zaberga, an Arab resident, 
claimed: “The intention of these settlers is to bring about the expulsion 
of Arabs from the mixed cities. The state wants to expel us” (in Levy & 
Liebek, 2013 ). Arabs also explained that rising prices in Lydda and state- 
led gentrification projects are leading them to move to older and cheaper 
apartments in less structurally sound neighborhoods, such as the Banit 
neighborhood and Ramat Eshkol. Some even leave the city for nearby 
villages such as Kafr Qasim. Alternatively, others move in with their 
parents and add a living room illegally. 
A Jewish-religious complex was also established in Jaffa. In contrast 
to Lydda, where the tender for the land was “tailor-made ” for the 
initiative and planning of Garin Torani, in Jaffa it was open. In 2009, the 
Israel Land Administration (ILA) published a tender (Israel Land 
Administration, 2009 ) for purchasing land at 6 Ger Tzedek Street, which 
covers 426 square meters. Seven families from Garin Torani organized as 
a purchasing group and submitted a bid for NIS 1,890,000 (about 
604,500 USD). Arab entrepreneurs also approached the tender, but since 
they submitted lower bids, they lost. As a result, the Garin Torani fam-
ilies won the tender and constructed a residential building on the land. 
Despite the ethnonational agenda behind this process, the economic 
leverage of the majority group played a key role in state-led ethno- 
gentrification, similar to classical gentrification. In this case, the mi-
nority displacement was not a product of pure colonialism but an eco-
nomic opportunity that capitalism and gentrification provided the more 
affluent majority group. 
In the same year, the ILA published another tender for construction 
of 20 housing units on 1337 square meters of land on Sternhartz Street in 
the Ajami neighborhood of Jaffa (Ha'Etrog project). Prior to announcing 
the tender, the ILA evicted the local vegetable merchants, offering them 
financial compensation. A company named Be'emuna-Housing to the 
National Religious Public Ltd. established a purchasing group of reli-
gious Zionist families (the Garin Torani) to bid for the land and establish 
a residential complex. The company won the tender and built three-story 
buildings with a total of 20 apartments and penthouses (see Fig. 3). 
The founder of the Garin Torani, David, described the motivations 
for constructing the complex: 
Fig. 2.Ramat Elyashiv neighborhood, aerial view. 
Note. From Ramat Elyashiv Neighborhood Committee , [Photograph of Ramat 
Elyashiv neighborhood], by Grinberg, I., (n.d.) https://sites.google.com/site/el 
yashivneighborhood/ . 
Fig. 3.A residential building in the Ha'Etrog complex in Jaffa. 
Note. Photograph taken by the author. Y. Shmaryahu-Yeshurun                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cities 130 (2022) 103881
6The residents of Jaffa did not believe that middle-income young 
families would come to live here. They suffered from an aging pop-
ulation and a lack of children … also from the criminality of the Arab 
population…. They felt that Jaffa is being lost and [that] the Jewish 
identity was also being lost. Therefore, we came to Jaffa to 
strengthen the Jewish identity of its residents. 
(David, personal communication, 2021) 
Arab residents in Jaffa claimed that by allocating the public land to a 
company that discriminates against them in apartment marketing, the 
government essentially promoted their displacement. As Knesset mem-
ber Afou Agbaria claimed in a Knesset committee meeting: “The 
declared goal of the project developer is to Judaize the city and exclude 
its Arab residents” (Interior and Environmental Protection Committee, 
2009). Arab residents claim that rising prices in Jaffa are compelling 
residents to leave for other cities such as Tayibe, Tira, Qasim village, 
Lydda, Ramla, and Bat-Yam. 
At the same meeting, Advocate Amir Badran, a city council member 
and representative of the Association for Jaffa Arabs, explained: 
My parents and I lived in this area… It is impossible to ignore the 
housing crisis [of Arabs]… the land reserves of the Israel Land 
Administration have run out, so the little that is left, we must keep. If 
it goes to other populations, it hurts us twice—the first time because 
the state's commitment to solve our housing crisis could not be met, 
and the second time, because they introduce a foreign group that will 
surely harm coexistence. Therefore, there is resistance. 
(Interior and Environmental Protection Committee, 2009) 
Arab residents, activists, and human rights organizations argued that 
the state has a responsibility to ensure that whichever company won the 
tender would not discriminate against residents on an ethnonational 
basis. A coalition of organizations attempted to halt construction of the 
Ajami housing project through a court petition in 2009, and in 2010 they 
also appealed to the Supreme Court (AdminA 1789/10, 2010). The Su-
preme Court rejected the petition on the grounds of fait accompli since 
the project was in advanced stages. Thus, in 2020, the complex was 
inhabited by Zionist religious families organized as Garin Torani mem-
bers. However, following this case, the ILA has confirmed that for future 
tenders, it will prohibit participating developers from practicing 
discrimination when marketing and populating housing units. 
Similar to Lydda, a “tailor-made” tender for a religious neighborhood 
was published in Acre. In 2005, the rabbi of Garin Torani founded an 
association aimed at creating a religious neighborhood for Acre. After 
identifying appropriate land, Garin Torani members recruited policy -
makers in local municipality and government to obtain building rights 
for construction. Garin Torani then organized as a purchasing group 
called the Association for the Construction of a Religious Neighbo -
rhood—Acre, winning the tender published in 2011 from the ILA. A 
religious neighborhood called Neve/Neot Eliyahu was established and 
populated by 153 religious Jewish families. The ILA published another 
tender for construction of a smaller residential complex with 43 housing 
units, which the Association for the Development of Acre and Con-
struction won. This association is another branch of Garin Torani. 
Construction of the neighborhood, which began in 2013, was 
populated within three years and officially inaugurated in 2017. 
Admission to the neighborhood was granted to religious Jews only, 
conditional on the approval of Garin Torani's rabbi. The Garin Torani 
CEO, Shlomo Klein, explained their motivation for establishing the 
neighborhood: 
What made us come to Acre is the distress of the dwindling Jewish 
population in the city… They felt they were being pushed out, so we 
wanted to strengthen the Jewish hold on the city… One day there 
could be an Arab majority in Acre, the consequences of which would 
be severe because it would become an Arab city and not a mixed one. 
(2015, as cited in Yahav, 2015) When speaking at a community building event in Acre, Prime Min-
ister Benjamin Netanyahu demonstrated the integration of ethno -
nationalism and economic motivations within state-led gentrification: 
These groups… All of them [are] Zionists, all of them passionate 
about taking action. This is expressed through the spirit of volun -
teerism that is quite simply refreshing and provides a tremendous 
amount of hope… [they are engaged] in cultural activities in the 
community, in strengthening the Jewish and Zionist identity of the 
city… They contribute to society, overcome hardship… I want to 
thank you all—you are truly genuine pioneers of our time. 
(Israeli Prime Minister's Office, 2012) 
Resisting the policy, a coalition of organizations tried petitioning the 
Haifa District Court in 2012 to cancel the association's winning of the 
tender due to ethnic discrimination. In their lawsuit, they mentioned the 
ILA's commitment to equal marketing following the Jaffa case, aiming to 
cancel Garin Torani's successful bid. The court rejected their petition on 
the grounds that merely publishing the project as intended for the reli-
gious Jewish population does not adequately prove that Arab residents 
seeking to purchase an apartment in the complex will be denied (Case 
(DC Hi), 2012). This proof was solidified later, after the neighborhood 
had already been established. Sami Hawari, an Arab resident who 
wanted to purchase an apartment and was denied, sued the contractor 
company over ethnonational discrimination and won the lawsuit. Ac-
cording to him: 
The discriminatory marketing of apartments in the new neighbor -
hood is just one of many examples of discrimination against Arab 
residents in city housing. They evict Arab residents from Old Acre 
and prevent them from living with dignity in other neighborhoods. 
This creates a severe sense of discrimination, claiming that we are 
second-class citizens. 
(Hawari, 2012, cited in Hodi, 2012) 
I argue that establishment of religious neighborhoods in such con-
tested cities expresses state-led ethno-gentrification. It explicitly com-
bines economic motivations of developers with the ethnonational 
motivations of a middle-class population desiring to strengthen the 
Jewish presence and character of the cities. 
7.2. Privatization of public housing for settlement associations 
Privatizing public housing to settlement associations is a second 
institutional mechanism for promoting ethno-gentrification. In a multi- 
stage process, the state transfers ownership of public housing apart -
ments from private Arab ownership to private Jewish ownership (see 
Table 1). Initially, these apartments were managed by the Custodian of 
Absentee Property, who then transferred them to the Development Au-
thority and later to government housing companies. The housing com-
panies then rented them out to sheltered tenants. At these stages, 
although management and use of the apartments were transferred to the 
state, they remained Arab-owned. This changed with the governmental 
resolution to sell the apartments to private hands (Transfer of Property 
Law, 1950; Government Resolution No. 1543, 1997; Council Resolution 
No. 921, 2001). 
A prominent example of this mechanism is the transfer of four 
buildings that were originally absentee properties in the Old City of Acre 
in 2007 to the previously mentioned Ayalim Association. The organi -
zation used the buildings to house about 20 of its members. State-led 
gentrification through privatization of public housing has both a 
neoliberal agenda, like global gentrification, and an ethnonational 
agenda, particular to the contested space. First of all, it serves as a relief 
to the economic burden of maintaining apartments and improving 
neighborhood visibility. As described in the website of New Amidar (n. 
d.): Y. Shmaryahu-Yeshurun                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cities 130 (2022) 103881
7They renovate apartments of the elderly population and improve the 
image of public space in disadvantaged neighborhoods. The combi -
nation of young people who live in these neighborhoods alongside 
public housing residents leads to a significant improvement in living 
conditions in the neighborhoods, improving their atmosphere. 
Second, public housing privatization carries its own ethnonational 
motivation, as the mayor's advisor detailed: 
We need once and for all to end poverty, crime, vandalism, drugs, 
and the isolation of Arabs in the Old City… [So we] brought in 
Ayalim Association. We wanted to realize the potential of the Old 
City, to be aesthetic and to promote culture … if Arabs would buy 
these properties, it would not make this change … so if the Old City is 
developing and there are also Jews living there, is that not something 
positive at the national level too? 
(Anonymous, personal communication, 2021) 
Ayalim members also presented the Jewish presence as preventing 
the radicalization of Arab society in Acre. As Ayalim director Yafit 
mentioned: 
Ayalim's goal is [to create a] Zionist Jewish presence … there was a 
strong presence of radical elements of the outlawed Islamic move -
ment. When Ayalim came in, it was the first time that Jews lived here 
and the status quo was changed. 
(Yafit, personal communication, 2021) 
The buildings in question (see Fig. 4) were transferred to the Ayalim 
Association through the Jewish Agency. This process exempted Ayalim 
from holding a tender under the mandatory tender regulations. As David Harari, CEO of the Old Acre Development Company, explained, “We 
transferred assets to the Jewish Agency, which is exempt from the ten-
der, and the agency transferred the assets to an organization like Aya-
lim” (in Khoury, 2010 ). Property privatization involved many stages and 
players, alternately using tools of privatization and nationalization (see 
Table 1). The process's final stage was the transfer of properties from 
Arab ownership to Jewish ownership. 
Arab residents of Old Acre claimed that this policy displaced them on 
both an economic and ethnonational basis. Just like with the Lydda case, 
they stated that rising prices in old Acre are causing residents to leave for 
nearby villages or move in with their parents illegally. Many of them 
gathered in the streets to protest this change. As noted by Khatib, a 
resident of Old Acre, “We've lived in the Old City for 72 years, my father 
was born here and my grandfather... the state does not want Arabs here; 
maybe some Arabs, but not a majority ” (H. Khatib, personal communi -
cation, 2017). 
While in Acre privatizing public housing succeeded without a tender, 
in Jaffa a public tender was published for Building No. 15 on Ziona 
Tagger Street. The building, abandoned by its Arab owners in 1948, was 
transferred according to the Absentee Property Law to the governmental 
Company of Amidar, which housed Jewish families and later put the 
building up for sale (Absentee Property Law, 1950 ). After changing 
ownership multiple times, the building was eventually transferred in 
2016 to the Shirat Moshe Yeshiva for housing its students. The yeshiva (a 
Jewish educational institution for men) was established in Jaffa as part 
of the Garin Torani settlement in Jaffa. The head of the yeshiva, Eliyahu 
Mali, emphasized their national motivation for settling in Jaffa: 
There is an accelerated spiritual problem here, and our job is to 
revive the Jewish Torah and prayer. [It's part] of a general move to 
bring the spirit of Judaism back to the cities of the center … The new 
enterprise of Zionism should be spiritual Zionism. 
(2016, in Kashti, 2016 ) 
Both ethno-gentrification and resistance to it have intensified over 
the years. 
In 2021 after the rabbi and CEO tried to purchase another apartment 
for the yeshiva in Jaffa, they were attacked by young Arab residents. 
Later, Arabs and Jews together protested what they perceived as eth-
nonational and class displacement following the state-led gentrification. 
They carried signs in the streets reading, “Jaffa not for sale, ” “the Yes-
hiva —shit of neighbors, ” “The White City in the Service of Capital, ” and 
“The Market is Free —If You Are Rich and Jewish ”. 
In Jaffa, we see examples of both neoliberal and ethnonational 
gentrification. Neo-liberal gentrification caused the displacement of 
disadvantaged Jewish and Arab residents by middle- and upper-class 
populations; among these more affluent populations were also Arabs. 
Ethnonational gentrification, on the other hand, is described by Arab 
residents as a policy that displaced them mostly on an ethnonational 
basis. Table 1 
Privatization of public housing for the Ayalim Association. 
Note. Table designed by the author. 
Fig. 4.An Ayalim Association building in the Old City. 
Note. Photograph taken by the author. Y. Shmaryahu-Yeshurun                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cities 130 (2022) 103881
87.3. Allocating public buildings and privatizing public services to 
settlement associations 
Another institutional mechanism that promotes ethno-gentrification 
is allocating municipalities' public buildings and privatizing public ser-
vices to the settlement associations. In Acre, the municipal government 
has allocated public assets in the eastern area to benefit the offices of 
Garin Torani. In addition, it has transferred to Garin Torani budgets and 
responsibilities for providing certain welfare and educational services. 
These include enrichment classes in schools and centers for children and 
youth at risk. Such municipal actions transformed Garin Torani into an 
executive arm of city government. 
Similarly, the Tel Aviv-Yafo municipality allocated public assets to 
the Garin Torani in Jaffa. One of these assets, located at 16 Toulouse 
Street next to the Shirat Moshe Yeshiva, is used for Torah study and 
prayers by the yeshiva students. In Lydda, the municipality allocated 
public buildings and land for housing and activities of both the Garin 
Torani and Ayalim associations. For example, management of the Den-
ver Community Center and Chicago Community Center was transferred 
to Garin Torani, who initially provided their services only for the Jewish 
population. Later, due to resistance from Arab residents, the Chicago 
community center was also opened to the Arab population. H. Samer, an 
Arab activist in the neighborhood, commented: 
We want to live together [Arab and Jews] … I was one of the fighters 
for opening the community center to Arabs as well... ... Why not 
invest in the local population? Why do we not have community 
centers? After all, it is impossible not to be jealous. Garin Torani 
came here and got everything … buildings, a budget, a separate 
community center system just for them … why don't we? 
(Personal communication, 2019) 
Similarly, the municipality of Lydda allocated buildings to the Aya-
lim Association. In 2011, public land on Herzl Street in the city center 
was allocated for establishing Ayalim's student village. On land equaling 
2.4 dunams (approximately 2870 square yards), Ayalim built a two-story 
residential building for housing about 70 of its members. In 2013, the 
municipality allocated a second building for student housing on Kdoshi 
Kehilat Mezrich street. The Israeli Ministry of Finance provided Ayalim 
funds for renovating the formerly abandoned building (see Fig. 5), after 
which 40 organization members moved in. Local residents outside of the 
organization claim that these complexes are gated and inaccessible to 
them (see Fig. 6), as Bahalul explained: 
The Ayalim complex is built in a public area, which was open in the 
past as part of a public park. Then the area was closed with a fence and they added a gate… As a mother, for me it could have been a 
great area to spend time with my son, but not anymore. 
(H. Bahalul, personal communication, 2019) 
7.4. Selective governmental budgeting 
The state of Israel provides budgets for selective settlement associ -
ations. These budgets are provided through many government minis -
tries, including the Ministry for the Development of the Periphery, the 
Negev and the Galilee, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Develop -
ment, the Ministry of Construction and Housing, and the Ministry of 
Education. In 2013, for example, 110 million Israeli new shekels 
(approximately 33.5 million USD) were allocated to settlement associ -
ations from different ministries (State Comptroller of Israel, 2017 , pp. 
253). 
Analysis of seven calls from government ministries to support set-
tlement associations, published between 2012 and 2017, reveal that 
governmental support is conditional. Specifically, it depends on the 
associations' obligation to strengthen Jewish identity and Zionism, serve 
in the military or at the national level, and recruit a high percentage of 
newcomers (i.e., Israeli natives from other cities). In 2011, for example, 
the Ministry for the Development of the Periphery, the Negev and the 
Galilee set a goal to bring 600,000 new residents to those areas by 2020 
(Ministry of the Negev Galilee 2011 work plan, personal communica -
tion). In practice, these criteria in many cases either directly or indi-
rectly exclude local Arab residents from governmental support. 
In addition, some government ministries, and in particular the 
Ministry of Education, selectively publish calls for supporting associa -
tions such as Garin Torani. These calls for support do not allow other 
groups, such as local individuals, to apply for governmental support. 
Finally, over the years the state has provided budgets for particular as-
sociations. For example, between 2005 and 2013, the government 
allocated resources to the Ayalim Association (Government Resolutions 
Nos. 1041, 3651, 3796, and 1200 ). 
7.5. Symbolic capital and incentive 
The last and most covert institutional mechanism of promoting 
ethno-gentrification is the government's effort to symbolically portray 
settlement associations as a force for good in their nation. When poli-
cymakers visit contested cities during their election campaigns, they 
tend to focus their visits on the settlement associations' projects. These 
projects are well photographed, casting visions of reviving the cities and 
Fig. 5.Renovated student village on formerly public land. 
Note. Photograph taken by the author. 
Fig. 6.Gated fence surrounding Ayalim Student Housing. 
Note. Photograph taken by the author. Y. Shmaryahu-Yeshurun                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cities 130 (2022) 103881
9making the desert bloom (see, for example, Ziderman, 2013 ; Ayalim 
Official, 2012 ). Such trips allow policymakers to show their public 
involvement with and support of Zionism. Analyzing the policymakers' 
standpoint, as expressed in official speeches between 2012 and 2019, 
reveals that settlement association members are presented as salt of the 
earth, modern pioneers, Zionist, and quality activist residents (see, for 
example, Israeli Prime Minister's Office, 2012 ). The locals, Jews, and 
Arabs, on the other hand, are presented as passive or problematic pop-
ulations. As Prime Minister Naftali Bennett (cited in Schechter, 2012 ) 
mentioned: 
The city of Acre is becoming Arab … There is Arabic music, Muslim 
flags … many harassments. In the Old City, most of the signs are in 
Arabic, not in Hebrew … The Jews do not survive and therefore 
leave … We met a group of caring young people in Acre who want to 
save the city—Garin Torani members who left the center of the 
country and came to settle in Acre. The Ayalim Organization who 
settles in the heart of the Old City… has wonderful people working in 
education, welfare … The state is a Jewish state, and it must maintain 
its character as such. 
8.Conclusion: towards a state-led ethno-gentrification theory 
In conceptualizing state-led ethno-gentrification and its mechanisms, 
this study contributes to the expansion of gentrification literature to a 
context outside the Global North. Simultaneously, it avoids the imple -
mentation of a diffusionist model with gentrification originating in the 
“West ” and moving to the “East” and “South ” (Betancur, 2014 ; Lees 
et al., 2016 ; L´opez-Morales, 2015 ). 
While the conventional narratives of state-led gentrification from the 
Global North focus on its neoliberal and economic motivations (Lees 
et al., 2016 ; Smith, 2002 ), the southeastern perspective (Yiftachel, 
2020 ) presented in this research reveals the ethnonational dimension 
behind the policy. It draws attention to a particular type of state-led 
gentrification, driven not only by economic motivations to redevelop 
disadvantaged urban spaces but also by the nation-state's need to 
strengthen the presence of its ethnic majority in contested cities. 
Accordingly, in this type of state-led ethno-gentrification, minority 
displacement results directly from nation-state territorialization projects 
rather than appearing as a side effect of economic disadvantage inter-
secting with ethnicity and race. Whereas gentrification literature has 
emphasized economic pressure and class disadvantage as the core di-
mensions leading to minority displacement, in settler colonialism liter-
ature, minority displacement is described as a direct and intentional 
result following national politics. In contrast, this study addresses the 
recent call to bridge gentrification theory and the literature on settler 
colonialism, ethnocracy, and the nation-state project (Ellis-Young, 2022 ; 
Kent-Stoll, 2020 ), showing that gentrification as an urban agenda can 
also be a tool for national agendas. 
As demonstrated, state-led ethno-gentrification processes are not 
sporadic but are consistently organized across at least three contested 
cities in Israel and two Zionist settlement associations operating in these 
cities. Through a meticulous examination of consistent patterns in these 
spaces, five institutional mechanisms of state-led ethno-gentrification 
are revealed. These include the establishment of religious neighbor -
hoods, privatization of public housing for Zionist settlement associa -
tions, allocation of public buildings and privatizing public services to 
those associations, allocation of selective governmental budgeting, and 
finally, symbolic incentive to the Zionist settlement associations. 
As Valle (2021) suggests, studying state-led gentrification from the 
Global South generates a fuller understanding of how displacement in 
different contexts happens. This minimizes the absolutist language and 
hegemonic understandings that center North American and European 
middle-class gentrifiers, economic trajectories, political histories, and 
property regimes. 
Despite the specific context of this case study, my findings call on gentrification scholars generally, especially those in ethnic/racial mi-
nority and indigenous areas, to critically examine the policy motivations 
for promoting gentrification. Such scholars should not assume that 
gentrification unintentionally displaces minorities as an institutional -
ized economic tool. Rather, the study encourages further exploration of 
minority displacement beyond the prevailing assumption that such 
displacement is a product of economic marginalization (Goetz, 2011 ; 
Wyly & Hammel, 2004 ). This insight is significant because it helps us 
understand how in the capitalist era, the nation-state no longer needs the 
use of overt, military, or government force to advance its national goals. 
Under the disguise of a free market, states may mobilize economic 
redevelopment projects such as gentrification as more subtle forms of 
territorial control over spaces featuring a conflict between the ethno -
national majority and minority. Second, the findings call on scholars of 
settler colonialism and contested cities to avoid hastily labeling any 
urban policy leading to minority displacement as “colonialism. ” Rather, 
scholars should carefully identify the economic opportunities, interests, 
and capitalist mechanisms that enable such displacement. 
Finally, using the southeastern perspective to study state-led 
gentrification in Israel is an attempt to problematize the common 
practice of grouping all regions other than Western European and North 
American into the Global South. As Paul Waley (2016) comments, “[t]he 
space created by the global East can be used to sidestep or better to 
deconstruct the dominant dualism of global North and global South. ” 
Thus, state-led ethno-gentrification represents a challenge to the domi -
nant northwestern perspective of neoliberalism and economic devel -
opment as the primary force behind gentrification. It also contradicts the 
Global South perspective, focused mainly on generating growth by the 
“neoliberal and authoritarian ” state or the nexus of large businesses and 
political elites. Ethno-gentrification pushes us to observe specific types 
of state-led gentrification, driven by ethnonationalist forces in spaces 
characterized by conflict between the ethnonational majority and mi-
nority around the globe. Future studies on other cases of state-led ethno- 
gentrification and its mechanisms and the comparison between them 
will help create a fuller understanding of minority displacement, not 
only as a product of the unintentional class-ethnicity intersection, but of 
deliberate policy, an angle that is obscured in today's urban literature 
(Ellis-Young, 2022 ; Kent-Stoll, 2020 ; Porter & Yiftachel, 2017 ). 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
The data that has been used is confidential. 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my PhD mentor, Professor Guy Ben-Porat from 
Ben Gurion University, for his guidance and advice; Professor Daniel 
Monterescu from the Central European University for working together 
on the case of Jaffa; my interviewees in Acre, Lydda and Jaffa who 
shared their experiences with me; and the anonymous reviewers who 
gave me constructive and valuable feedback. 
