Special issue article: Locating gentrification in the Global East
Urban Studies
2016, Vol. 53(3) 455–470
/C211Urban Studies Journal Limited 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0042098015620337usj.sagepub.com
Introduction: Locating gentrification
in the Global East
Hyun Bang Shin
London School of Economics and Political Science, UK
Loretta Lees
University of Leicester, UK
Ernesto Lo ´pez-Morales
Universidad de Chile, Chile; Centre for Studies of Conflict and Social Cohesion, Conicyt Fondap,
Chile
Abstract
This special issue, a collection of papers presented and debated at an Urban Studies Foundation-
funded workshop on Global Gentrification in London in 2012, attempts to problematise contem-
porary understandings of gentrification, which is all too often confined to the experiences of theso-called Global North, and sometimes too narrowly understood as classic gentrification. Instead
of simply confirming the rise of gentrification in places outside of the usual suspects of North
America and Western Europe, a more open-minded approach is advocated so as not to over-generalise distinctive urban processes under the label of gentrification, thus understanding gentrifi-
cation as constitutive of diverse urban processes at work. This requires a careful attention to the
complexity of property rights and tenure relations, and calls for a dialogue between gentrificationand non-gentrification researchers to understand how gentrification communicates with other the-
ories to capture the full dynamics of urban transformation. Papers in this special issue have made
great strides towards these goals, namely theorising, distorting, mutating and bringing into ques-tion the concept of gentrification itself, as seen from the perspective of the Global East, a label that
we have deliberately given in order to problematise the existing common practices of grouping all
regions other than Western European and North American ones into the Global South.
Keywords
Asia, gentrification, Global East, urbanisation, urbanism
Received November 2015; accepted November 2015
Introduction
This special issue has grown out of the
papers presented and discussions debated atCorresponding author:
Hyun Bang Shin, Department of Geography andEnvironment, London School of Economics and Political
Science, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK.
Email: h.b.shin@lse.ac.uk

a 2012 workshop on Global Gentrification
in London, part of an event funded by the
Urban Studies Foundation. The event
brought together a number of early careerand established scholars to critically engagewith gentrification questions in Asia morewidely. In this special issue we bringtogether as a set the East Asian cases: from
the Tiger economies of Hong Kong,
Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan, theTiger Cub economies of the Philippines andIndonesia, and the transitional economies ofMainland China and Vietnam. Located geo-graphically proximate to each other in the
same region, these countries display some
shared experiences such as rapid urbanisa-tion, export-oriented economic developmentand strong developmental states withauthoritarian pasts or inclinations, yet theoutcomes of their actual urbanisation and
urban development are variegated due to
their place-based geographical and historicalspecificities (e.g. transitional economies ver-sus other capitalist late industrialisers). Wegroup these cases together under the label
Global East, a term we have used elsewhere
in the introduction and conclusion to ourrecent edited volume on global gentrifica-tions (Lees et al., 2015; see also Waley,2016). We use this broad but encompassingterm in order to refer to a geographical
world region that shares a common histori-
cal past but equally importantly demon-strates some stark differences in terms ofurbanisation and gentrification. This label-ling is designed to picture the Global East orEast Asia as one homogeneous region; how-
ever, we are mindful of Gayatri Chakravarty
Spivak’s (2007) call for pluralising Asia,which from a postcolonial perspective doesnot reduce the entire region to a homoge-neous ‘other’, but understands it through its
multiplicity of differences. Our use of the
term Global East is deliberate; it is anattempt to problematise the existing commonpractices of grouping all regions other thanWestern European and North American
ones into the Global South. As Paul Waley
(2016) comments, ‘[t]he space created by the
global East can be used to sidestep or betterto deconstruct the dominant dualism of glo-bal North and global South’.
‘Locating gentrification in the Global
East’ is not simply about confirming the riseof gentrification in places outside of the
usual suspects of North America and
Western Europe. It is also not to over-generalise distinctive urban processes underthe label of gentrification. Recently, gentrifi-
cation has become subject to an increasing
degree of scrutiny among researchers andgovernments as well as in media. Amongvarious forms of gentrification, new-build
gentrification has been a relatively frequent
theme to be explored in East Asia (e.g. He,2010; He and Wu, 2007; Lu ¨tzeler, 2008).
The relationship between education andneighbourhood change has also been subject
to some recent studies (e.g. Waley et al.,
2016), while commercial gentrification hasreceived steady attentions (e.g. Kim et al.,2010; Wang, 2011). The prevalence of urban
redevelopment activities in East Asian cities
in recent decades often propels researchersto explore the relationship between redeve-lopment and gentrification (e.g. Fujitsuka,
2015; Ha, 2004; He and Wu, 2007; Lim et
al., 2013; Roderos, 2013; Shin, 2009a;Wong, 2006), although redevelopment oftenturns out to be a more preferred term to gen-trification (see Ley and Teo, 2014). We aim to
build upon this accumulated knowledge, but
a tt h es a m et i m ew ea r ea w a r et h a tu n t i lrecently, the gentrifica tion literature has been
overly preoccupied with the identification of
particular forms of gentrification without pay-
ing adequate attention to how gentrificationinteracts with other urban processes. In thisspecial issue, as in our recently published edi-
ted volume on global gentrifications ,w e
adhere to a more open-minded approach,
which understands gentrification as456 Urban Studies 53(3)
constitutive of divers eu r b a np r o c e s s e sa t
work. Gentrification can be an established
and influential urban process that affects the
life chances of local inhabitants in one place,whilst in other places it might simply be asubsidiary, nascent process at work in tandem
with other urban processes. Contributors to
this special issue attempt to situate gentrifica-tion amongst multiple urban processes simul-taneously at work in East Asia.
The papers in this special issue, therefore,
give consideration to the historicity of urbandevelopment, and the contributors have been
reminded to critically revisit the very Anglo-
American ‘geography of gentrification’.Unlike much other work on gentrification inEast Asia, this collection avoids the assump-
tion that gentrification is simply ‘expanding’
towards the Global East (periphery) throughcolonisation or one-way policy transfer, as ifit is an imported new phenomenon thatbuilds upon emerging real estate markets.
Indeed, this special issue and our forthcom-
ing book Planetary Gentrification (Lees
et al., 2016) opens up the possibility that gen-trification has been taking place in various
guises outside of the West. We are mindful
of Eric Clark’s (2005) proclamation that weshould not confuse the coining of ‘gentrifica-tion’ by Ruth Glass with its origin. It may
also be possible that only the systematic and
social scientific observation of these pro-cesses is something new, but not the actualphenomena themselves. Furthermore, whileNeil Smith referred to gentrification as one
of the three key characteristics of contempo-
rary geo-economics under neoliberal states,it may also be possible to theorise that gen-trification itself is a function of capitalist
states of all disguises rather than simply a
function of neoliberal states. The experiencesin non-Western contexts deserve carefulattention, and the East Asia region, with allits differences and complexities, serves as a
primary test site for these enquiries in this
special issue.Conceptualising gentrification:
Generality versus particularity
Recently, gentrification has been subject to
criticism for its limited consideration of thedivergent urban processes that produce dis-placement and dispossession. For some, thishas provoked another turn away from gen-trification studies, and the ditching of a ‘gen-trification’ framework in the discussion ofurban processes outside of the GlobalNorth. But these differentially problematiccritiques somehow envision a prototype ofgentrification built on an imagined westernmodel of gentrification (see e.g. Maloutas,2012). That is, the critiques launched arebased on the cultural association of gentrifi-cation with a particular time and spacerelated to its earlier coining and conceptuali-sation. They refer primarily to what isknown to be classic gentrification. The ety-mology ‘gentry’ is singled out as evidencefor the inability of ‘gentrification’ as a con-cept to travel across cultural boundaries; forgentry is a class category that is too specificto England and the term is therefore suscep-tible to poor translation into other lan-
guages (see Lees, 2012: 157–158 for the
different concepts employed in countriesother than Britain). It is a problem evenwithin the West, as this ‘narrative’ cannot betranslated into Western countries other thanEngland/Britain. But it has been! Indeedcritics working in and on non-usual gentrifi-cation suspects will always find aspects thatare not captured by classic gentrification,and so it is far too easy to use such aspectsas sources of contention to argue against theeffectiveness of gentrification as a social sci-entific concept. We are all familiar with theridiculing outcry ‘not gentrification again’,resonating with the similar frustration: ‘iseverything neoliberal’.
In formulating a definition of the city it is nec-
essary to exercise caution in order to avoididentifying urbanism as a way of life with anyShin et al. 457
specific locally or historically conditioned cul-
tural influences which, while they may signifi-cantly affect the specific character of thecommunity, are not the essential determinantsof its character as a city. (Wirth, 1938: 7)
Louis Wirth in his writing on cities and
urbanism provides a telling story of how we
are to carry out abstraction based on com-parative studies of cities. By bringing
together ‘different types of cities’ and identi-
fying ‘essential characteristics’ they may‘have in common as social entities’ (Wirth,
1938: 7), a definition of the city is drawn for
him. Comparative studies of gentrificationprovide a similar opportunity for us to
define what gentrification is about and to be
able to distinguish particularity from gener-ality, a thought-process that is analogous tothe ways in which Karl Marx was making a
distinction between commodity-form and
value-form (Merrifield, 2014: 6). As EricClark pointed out, ‘[a]bstractions based on
non-necessary relations lead to chaotic
conceptions’ (2005: 258). One major achieve-ment of comparative scholarship on gentrifi-
cation in recent years is the abstraction of
gentrification from conjunctural factors,contesting a decades-long ‘time–space deli-
neation’ that associated gentrification with a
particular point in time and space, that is,inner London in the 1960s during the timeof Ruth Glass’s investigation into neigh-
bourhood change. We have moved far from
that time and place, and come to understandthat gentrification as a concept refers to the
commodification of space accompanying
land use changes in such a way that it pro-duces indirect/direct/physical/symbolic dis-
placement of existing users and owners by
more affluent groups. Conceptualised in thisway, it is only logical to think of various
conjunctural factors that produce particular
forms of gentrification in around the globe.Furthermore, it is also logical to understand
that the gentrification process is conjoinedby other processes in order to ensure the
facilitation of this transformation, including
the use of police forces to suppress resis-
tance, the co-optation of opposition forces,and the imposition of dominant ideologieson subordinate classes. And, these are pro-
cesses not just seen in countries belonging to
regions outside of the so-called GlobalNorth, but currently happening in the
Global North too, as the state-led gentrifica-
tion and social cleansing of public housingand the poor attests to (see Lees, 2014a,2014b).
Nevertheless, locating gentrification in
non-Western contexts still faces numerous
challenges, for commodification of space is a
process that is manifested in a variegatedway. As testified by contributors to this spe-cial issue, such commodification may hap-
pen in peri-urban areas in a fast-growing
metropolitan region such as Bandung City,Indonesia (Hudalah et al., 2016), in historiccity centres with the presence of rich heritage
sites (Chang, 2016; Jou et al., 2016), or in
former urbanised villages in new centralbusiness districts (Shin, 2016). Not onlyexisting buildings with formal titles but also
informal properties or properties constrained
by, for example, the legacy of socialist own-ership may be subject to commodification,
often in a selective way to suit the purpose of
accumulation and beautification (Choi,2016; La Grange and Pretorius, 2016; Shin,2016; Yip and Tran, 2016). The diversity of
such processes requires us to acknowledge
the complexities of land and housing tenureor property relations that can be found ineach locality. And these complexities are
very much prevalent in the Global North
too, hence the importance of not associatinga particular form of gentrification such asslum gentrification with the Global South
only (see Lees et al., 2015, 2016).
Such complexities may operate to prevent
gentrification from becoming a dominant
force in a given place: this can happen, for458 Urban Studies 53(3)
instance, by the presence of heavily fragmen-
ted (formal or informal) property rights,
acting as insurmountable constraints on con-
verting properties into marketable commodi-ties. Slums such as Dharavi in Mumbai may
experience precarious durability (Weinstein
2014), and it may take a much longer timefor Dharavi to be subject to slum gentrifica-tion, if it ever occurs, than the gentrification
of slums elsewhere (e.g. in South Korea; see
Chapter 6 in Lees et al., 2016). At the sametime, (urban) spaces are always subject to
uneven development. As such, it is possible
that other places with more formal propertyrelations in a city known to experience pre-
valence of informal land and housing tenure
are seeing the intrusion of real estate capitaland affluent classes taking over propertiesfrom poorer populations. This process of
uneven commodification of space appears to
be an experience shared by many cities intro-duced in this special issue.
The rising importance of gentrification, in
the face of those who wish to turn away from
‘gentrification’, lies perhaps in the fact that it
is the rise of real estate that brings to the forethe importance of capital investment in thebuilt environment, which leads to changes in
land use and the composition of residing
inhabitants. When we discuss urban pro-cesses to identify the on-going dominant pro-
cesses, who captures the benefits of land
revalorisation becomes the key site of con-tention. It is the fetishisation of real estatecommodities and the use of real estate invest-
ment as a driver of urban socio-spatial
change, resulting in the exclusive use of newspaces for more affluent middle or upper
class groups, at the expense of, and exploit-
ing the use value held by, lower and workingclass populations. This process has madegentrification central to urban research since
the late twentieth century in particular.
In this special issue we argue that the
complexity of property rights and tenure
relations cannot be taken as a justification tothrow overboard ‘gentrification’ both as a
concept and as a process. As Lo ´pez-Morales
(2015: 571) noted recently, ‘both a useful
and generic gentrification theory and a rent
gap theory have much to offer given the
increasingly ferocious land and housing mar-
kets evident in many developing economies
of the global South’. We understand that
actually existing gentrification takes multiple
forms, thus our labelling of global gentrifica-
tions, as gentrification conjoins with local
accumulation processes, institutional land-
scapes, social relations and political strug-
gles, for this is how commodification ofspace occurs in the real world. Gentrification
and non-gentrification researchers alike need
to be reminded of these complexities and the
simultaneous presence of multiple processes
and to have mutual dialogues (e.g. develop-
ment geographers with gentrification
researchers, and so on).
Gentrification, public discourse
and political mobilisation
In East Asia, until fairly recently, the term
‘gentrification’ has not been subject to much
public debate, and relatively few academic
outputs utilising gentrification theory have
appeared; those that have tended to follow
Anglo-American models and discussions.
Within East Asia, more frequently utilised
expressions in both the media and academic
circles include those that can be loosely
translated into ‘renewal’, ‘redevelopment’ or
‘regeneration’. When referring to the nega-
tive impacts of urban projects, expressions
such as ‘eviction’ and ‘forced demolition’
have been more readily used. To this extent,
gentrification as a concept had, until
recently, a limited impact on forming a criti-
cal discourse among academics, grassrootsorganisations and activists. By way of com-
parison, in the Latin American region use of
the term ‘gentrification’ is increasingly inter-
twined with the discourses of social activistsShin et al. 459
and policy makers (see Lo ´pez-Morales et al.,
forthcoming). In the face of this, the papers
in this special issue underline the usefulness
of ‘gentrification’ as a critical conceptualisa-tion of urban processes in the Global East.
In places such as Hong Kong, a former
city-state that experienced large-scale clear-
ance of squatter settlements, extensive public
housing schemes and the domination ofcommercial real estate projects (Smart,2006), classic gentrification as revealed by
Ruth Glass does not exist. As Ley and Teo
(2014) have argued, it is only when weabstract from the particularities associated
with regional/historical variances of gentrifi-
cation and focus on the key characteristics(of value extraction from land and resultingdisplacement) that we begin to see the opera-
tion of urban processes that bring our atten-
tion to gentrification. It is in this regard thatLa Grange and Pretorius (2016) also argue
that the inner-city redevelopment of Hong
Kong facilitated by the state agency ofurban Renewal Authority has produced gen-
trification, although it has taken place more
selectively and is an incomplete, on-goingprocess.
Other Asian countries, such as South
Korea and China, have seen the prevalenceof wholesale clearance and reconstruction as
the main mode of property-led urban redeve-
lopment for many decades, long before suchprocesses were conceptualised as ‘new-build’gentrification in the West (see Davidson and
Lees, 2005, 2010, on ‘new-build gentrifica-
tion’). It is important to understand thatlarge-scale, wholesale demolition and recon-
struction of entire neighbourhoods has
become the norm for urban neighbourhoodchange. Seoul, for instance, has experienced
the so-called ‘joint redevelopment pro-
gramme’ from its inception in 1983 (Ha,2004). In Beijing and Shanghai, China,wholesale demolition and redevelopment has
also become prevalent since the 1990s, when
the real estate sector attracted both domesticand foreign capital under state directives. If
gentrification was only understood in its
classic sense among researchers in East Asia
or associated with only gradual incrementalchanges over time (e.g. Kim et al., 2010; Kimand Nam, 1998; Qiu, 2002), such practices of
urban redevelopment would have fallen
short of being identified as gentrification.Instead, they bear a strong resemblance tocontemporary state-led, ‘new-build’ gentrifi-cation in Western cities. In this regard, Shin
and Kim (2016) emphasise the historicity of
such processes, which took place before theneoliberalisation of the country, locatinggentrification as part of a more intrinsic and
endogenous urban process that has charac-
terised Seoul’s urban development and itshigh-density reconstruction.
With the mounting pressure of domicide
due to reasons of urban beautification, realestate speculation or the securitisation of thehome as an asset (Porteous and Smith, 2001;
Shao, 2013; Shin, 2014), the struggle for
defending one’s own home and for collectiveconsumption becomes a paramount urbanquestion (Merrifield, 2014), which requires a
concerted effort to produce alliances that go
beyond a given geographical boundary.Despite this, some scholars, even those advo-cating a critical approach to urban studies,
that we have come across at various confer-
ences and meetings, are against the use of‘gentrification’ outside the Global North,preferring use of ‘urban renewal’, ‘urbanregeneration’ or ‘urban redevelopment’ in
lieu of gentrification. Their reasoning is that
these expressions are more encompassing,allowing gentrification as well as non-gentrification processes to be considered. We
argue against such a proposition, for those
same expressions are often mobilised bypolitical and business elites to package theiractions in value-neutral terms and to presentprofit-maximising and self-fulfilling political
actions as positive policies for existing resi-
dents (see Lees et al., 2008). We understand460 Urban Studies 53(3)
the destruction of neighbourhoods and com-
munities to have significant detrimental
impacts on the lives of local (often poor, mar-
ginalised or less powerful )r e s i d e n t s ,b yb r e a k -
ing their social networks and damaging their
social capital. As Ray Forrest (2016) points
out, ‘using gentrification processes as the ana-
lytical lens places class at the centre of the
analysis – or at least it should do if it is being
deployed correctly’. As far as bottom-up
struggles around collective consumption are
concerned, gentrification is a politically effec-
tive concept that brings together people from
around the world, who are suffering from thethreats of eviction due to their areas being
put into a higher and better use for extracting
exchange value. We return to this point in the
concluding discussion.
Locating gentrification as part of
multiple urban processes at work
As Ley and Teo (2014: 1296) summarise,
gentrification is thought to be a ‘conceptual
category that provides a critical edge and
some theoretical coherence to physical and
social change incorporating eviction, displa-
cement, demolition and redevelopment’.
Nevertheless, it is important to probe the
ways in which gentrification communicates
with other theories to capture the full
dynamics of urban transformation. Critics
may argue that a city is gentrifying on the
basis of one case, while other cases from the
city may contradict this. Finding out which
processes are becoming more dominant
needs to be based on a more structural
understanding of the political economy of a
city and of the country in which cities are
positioned. By definition, gentrification
entails displacement, which suggests that
displaced residents may contribute to densi-fication of other equivalently affordable
neighbourhoods proximate to or afar from
their original neighbourhood (see e.g. Shin,2008). Concurrent development of a low-rise
neighbourhood’s densification could be seen
as a simultaneous non-gentrifying process.
Peter Marcuse’s (1986) discussion of exclu-sionary displacement also demonstrates the
need of going beyond the neighbourhood
scale for gentrification research. The gentri-fication literature often focuses on a singlecase study that involves a highly localised,
contextual understanding of neighbourhood
transition, but without adequate connectionwith wider urban processes. Therefore,before coming to an a priori conclusion that
gentrification has a limited or extensive pres-
ence in an East Asian city, it is recom-mended to go beyond the neighbourhood
scale (e.g. Shin and Kim, 2016), possibly
examining multiple cases in a comparativemanner (Ren and Luger, 2014).
The approach advocated in this special
issue is to pay attention to wider urban pro-cesses, and for urban theories to speak to each
other in order to highlight and critically exam-
ine the implications of an urban phenomenonsuch as neighbourhood redevelopment in arich, multifaceted way. For instance, high-
lighting the scale of development-induced
displacement facilitated by infrastructureprojects in Manila, th e Philippines, Choi
(2016) explains how landed elites possess
power to promote private development to cre-ate exclusive spaces, and how informal occu-pation of urban land and residents’ informal
nature of employment propel such residents
to face multiple vulnerabilities includingchances of direct and indirect displacement.She further hints at the possibility of how
infrastructure construction may contribute to
future elevation of property values in adjacentneighbourhoods, which in turn may prompt
gentrification (see also Lees et al., 2016,
Chapter 7, on the relationship between gentri-fication and infrastructure construction). Thishighlights the importance of not only having
a longer-term perspective when investigatingShin et al. 461
urban processes, but also going beyond the
immediate boundary of urban changes to
examine knock-on effects.
Furthermore, as Shin (2016) highlights
with regard to mainland China in transition
from a planned economy to a market econ-omy, public assets including public housing
have been subject to dispossession by local
states. Some properties held by former villa-gers and their collectives may also remaininformal, and be positioned outside the for-
mal real estate market. This is due to the
legacy of socialist planning and its persistentdisjoint from the expanding housing and
land market. While fragmented property
rights often act as a barrier to the commodi-fication of urban space, entrepreneurial localstates as de facto landowners (Hsing, 2010;
Shin, 2009b) resort to their state power to
help expropriate properties from existingusers and owners, and turn them into com-
modities for further accumulation. In this
context, the process of expropriating realestate properties and existing users’ property
rights could be understood by utilising the
theory of ‘accumulation by dispossession’ (seee.g. Glassman, 2006; Harvey, 2005, 2006). Inthe broader context of Chinese cities’ urbani-
sation and urban accumulation, this process
of dispossession of people’s rights and theirproperties acts as a precursor to a gentrifica-
tion that leads to the displacement of local
residents who lose their decades-long attach-ment to residential spaces and social net-works. The process of commodification and
class re-making of existing space can be
broadly termed as ‘gentrification’, but themarriage between the theory of ‘accumulation
by dispossession’ and ‘gentrification’ allows
us to delineate the particularities of socialistand post-socialist relat ions and the specifici-
ties of the (post-)socialist state in its role to
intervene in urban socio-spatial restructuring
(see Shin, 2016; see also Wu, 2015).
In the context of seeing a fundamental
political economic transition, historiclegacies may continue to exert influence on
urban development trajectories (path depen-
dency), while new innovations and the inclu-
sion of new domestic/foreign actors create a
break from the past (path breaking). McGee
(2009) discusses the hybridity of city-making
based on the combination of socialist and
capitalist modes of production in times of
transition. If urban spaces are subject to dif-
ferent forces, they would also go through
variegated experiences of transformation. As
a transitional economy Vietnam is seeing a
more controlled approach to city centre
redevelopment and the relocation of its resi-dents. As Yip and Tran (2016) argue,
Hanoi’s contemporary urban redevelopment
has not produced extensive (direct) displace-
ment due to the fact that it has focused
largely on brownfield sites, faced the com-
plex structure of property ownership (as a
socialist legacy), and witnessed weak state
capacity. Hanoi’s residents have also staged
‘persistent and relentless struggles to claim
their legal rights’ (Yip and Tran, 2016, this
issue), thus resulting in a heavier emphasis on
local residents’ re-hous ing. The characteristics
of Hanoi’s urban redevelopment prompts them
to claim that gentrification may not be applica-
ble to the analysis of contemporary urban
changes in Hanoi’s city centre, but they prefer
not to rule out the possibility of gentrification
looming over the city in the future when real
estate redevelopment is seemingly likely to
become more predatory, accompanied by the
potential weakening of the protection of resi-dents’ rights.
The nexus between the state and
the capital
In his afterword to the third edition of
Uneven Development , the late Neil Smith
(1984/2008) identified three key features
associated with the rise of geoeconomics,
seen from the perspective of neoliberal glo-
balism. One of his key features was the rise462 Urban Studies 53(3)
of gentrification as ‘a global urban strategy’,
facilitated by the neoliberal transformation
of the state. This coincided with the thesis of
other researchers who also wanted todemonstrate the global reach of gentrifica-tion in recent years in the context of neoli-
beralisation around the world (e.g. Atkinson
and Bridge, 2005). The rise of new-build andstate-led gentrification from the mid-2000sin the UK and North America was also dis-cussed in the context of the increasing influ-
ence of neoliberal states (Davidson and Lees,
2005, 2010; Hackworth and Smith, 2001). Assuch, the question of the state and its neolib-eral transformation is paramount in contem-
porary understandings of how gentrification
unfolds. The importance of the state isemphatically put forward by Loı ¨c Wacquant
(2008: 202) who suggests that ‘the primary
engine behind the (re)allocation of people,
resources and institutions in the city is thestate’, arguing that critics have paid lessattention to ‘the crucial role of the state inproducing not only space but the space of
consumers and producers of housing’.
This special issue examines the extent to
which gentrification has emerged from or
been hidden behind the context of condensedurbanisation in Asian developmental states,taking a more nuanced understanding of the
neoliberalisation of the state and its relation-
ship with gentrification (Park et al., 2012;see also Jou et al., 2016; Shin and Kim,2016). Studies on the Global East allow usto address this shortfall in existing studies,
and to understand how gentrification can be
part of urbanisation and urban accumula-tion strategies. While scholars have paidattention to geographical contingencies and
to the contextual understanding of gentrifi-
cation, there is a greater scope for gentrifica-tion researchers to take into account thepolitical economics of urban development innon-Western cities and in particular in the
Global East. East Asian states have dis-
played a strong presence in the economy andsociety, often displaying militaristic, authori-
tarian characteristics (Leftwich, 1995; Park
et al., 2012; Woo-Cumings, 1999). For a
long period, liberal democracies were con-trolled or hindered in order to facilitatemobilisation of available resources for eco-
nomic development and political gains.
Economic prosperity through an export-oriented economy and investment in fixedassets was supported by the exercise of statepower to coalesce and suppress oppositional
voices. Asian states addressed their own
legitimacy through a particularistic combi-nation of selective/productivist welfare pro-grammes and brutal suppression of civil
societies (Castells, 1992; Holliday, 2000).
These are manifested in the way displace-ment is handled in times of urban restructur-ing, and in the way existing dilapidated
(squatter/informal/formal) settlements were
subject to upgrading, clearance and redeve-lopment. Asian states in the course of con-densed urbanisation and industrialisationhave also made efforts to take care of the
politics of displacement, often resorting to
the use of violence and co-optation strategiesto ensure clean sites are acquired for capital(re-)investment (Shin, 2016; Watson, 2011).
Furthermore, this special issue provides a
viewpoint that differs from the usual argu-
ments on state-led gentrification in the
Western context. Unlike the return of thestate in times of neoliberal roll-out statismthroughout the 1990s in particular, spear-heading state-led mega-projects and easing
regulations to help finance speculative real
estate projects (see Smith, 2002), East Asianstates, especially Tiger economies, have beenstrongly intervening in and guiding the
channelling of surplus capital, purposefully,
into the built environment. And, this is not
necessarily as a result of the neoliberalisa-tion of the economies in the region but aspart of state building, urbanisation and
industrialisation under developmental stat-
ism (see Lees et al., 2016). These processesShin et al. 463
have been supported by strong authoritarian
states that have worked closely with, for
example, the popular sector and foreign cap-
ital in Singapore, large capitalists known aschaebols in South Korea, small and medium
capitalists in Taiwan, large conglomerates in
Japan having its origin in zaibatsu during
the imperial era, and capital-owning classesunder the Suharto regime in Indonesia(McCormack, 1995; Park, 1998; Robison,1988; Woo-Cumings, 1999). State socialism
in Vietnam and mainland China essentially
fused the state and businesses together tocreate the state sector during the socialistera, which continues to exert influence upon
contemporary urban development practices.
Nevertheless, it should also be pointed
out that more recent experiences have wit-
nessed changes to the political economicconfigurations of the East Asian economies.Democratisation, decentralisation and liber-alisation have taken place, albeit in a varie-
gated way. For instance, mainland China’s
transition to a market economy has takenplace under the relatively strong leadershipof the Party State, while local states are
given a certain degree of negotiated auton-
omy in terms of making decisions on landuse and urban development projects (Shin,2016). This is in contrast with the situations
in Vietnam, which is thought to display frag-
mented state power and weak administrativecapacity (Yip and Tran, 2016). Indonesia,after its democratisation, is known to exhibit‘institutional gaps’, produced by a fragile
regional government structure (Hudalah
et al., 2016). In Taiwan, the neoliberalisationof its authoritarian developmental state,coupled with democratisation after the end
of nearly four-decade-long martial law, has
arguably weakened the tie between thenational and local governments, drivinglocal governments to be increasingly entre-preneurial in their pursuit for economic and
real estate development (Jou et al., 2016). In
the Philippines, landed elites continue toexert strong influence on planning and out-
come of urban development (Choi, 2016).
The need of contextualising such variegated
political economies makes us become cau-tious about seeing gentrification as a simpletale of neo-colonial global process as
Atkinson and Bridge (2005) did. It is impor-
tant to view actually existing gentrificationprocesses as both historical and contextual,rather than created and imposed by externalforces. Hence, any discussion of gentrification
in the West that misses out the role of the
state needs to be reminded about how gentri-fication has shaped East Asian countries,where interventionist states have been guiding
the societal and economic developments for
much of their development trajectory andhave mutated over time vis-a `-vis pressures of
democratisation, neoliberalisation and other
political economic conjunctures.
An interesting commonality that has
emerged from some of the case studies in this
special issue is the control of state-owned
land as key assets. Hong Kong, Singapore,China and Vietnam all envisage the domi-nance of state land-ownership in urbanised
areas. Taiwan is also an economy that sees a
heavy presence of the state in land owner-ship (e.g. military ownership of key sites incities). The presence of large-scale public
housing programmes in Singapore and
Hong Kong, supported by their extensivepublic transport network and dense livingenvironment, is also argued to be minimisingresistance to displacement in times of redeve-
lopment (Ley and Teo, 2014). According to
La Grange and Pretorius (2016), HongKong has seen the presence of affordablehousing stocks and a lesser degree of social
segregation in the city centre, but they argue
that this situation is gradually changing, asthe city centre is subject to state-led gentrifi-cation in order to reap land/tax revenues forthe Hong Kong state and profits for real
estate developers whose presence has been
influential for much of Hong Kong’s recent464 Urban Studies 53(3)
history (see Haila, 2000). Chang (2016) also
provides a similar account of the state’spower in controlling and constraining moreautonomous forms of artistic inhabitation inheritage sites. Here, power is attributed tothe Singaporean state’s control of state landassets in addition to its authoritarian politi-cal culture. Mainland China is not an excep-tion in this regard, as Shin (2016) explains:state control of urban land assets and thereform of land administration has turnedentrepreneurial urban governments into defacto landlords (see also Shin, 2009b).Mainland Chinese cities are perhaps far more
advanced in terms of wielding their power to
remove socialist legacies in terms of creatingvibrant property markets, but this processhas come about due to the state exercising itspower to bring properties into the marketdomain through the dispossession of people’srights. What has become increasingly proble-matic in China’s large-scale redevelopment isthe displacement of ineligible private tenants,most of whom are migrant workers andtheir family members who go through socio-economic constraints and exclusionaryexperiences on a daily basis.
Conclusion
In this special issue, we have tried hard tomake sure not to ‘read gentrification in theGlobal South as simply the recreation of theperiphery (the urban South) in the image ofthe supposed centre (London or New York)’(Lees, 2012: 158). The special issue is anattempt to problematise our own under-
standings of gentrification, which is all too
often confined to the experiences of theso-called Global North, and sometimes toonarrowly understood as classic gentrificationby other scholars, often coming from a post-colonial perspective. We agree with Roy(2009) and Robinson (2011) when they arguefor a sort of free theory travelling and con-struction. We also appreciate their call todeconstruct and reconstruct theory from the
South, and for academics from the North to
be humble enough to incorporate theory-
making from the South. The contributors to,and editors of, this special issue have madegreat strides towards these goals, namely the-
orising, distorting, mutating and bringing into
question the concept of gentrification itself, asseen from the perspective of the Global East.In so doing this special issue contributes toglobal debates and provides insightful inter-
pretations of gentrifica tion that might be use-
ful to scholars from the North as well.
While we acknowledge and agree with the
importance of provincialising urban theoriesand decentring urban theory-making(Chakrabarty, 2000; McFarlane, 2010;
Robinson, 2011; Roy, 2009), we also call for
the importance of entering into a healthierdialogue between gentrification researchersand post-colonial researchers. Instead ofdownplaying the usefulness of gentrification
as a concept for those places experiencing
informal land-markets or fragmented prop-erty relations (e.g. peri-urban or outer ruralspaces) (see Ghertner, 2015), it is important
to have a longer-term perspective and under-
stand how existing constraints are oftendealt with by the state to clear the pathwayto gentrification. Indeed, as La Grange and
Pretorius (2016) acknowledge, the gentrifica-
tion story remains incomplete. In HongKong, uncertainties loom over the city interms of continuing with its current practicesof heavy reliance on land sale for the govern-
ment’s revenue generation combined with
developers’ profit-making through new-buildgentrification. Property assets have contribu-ted to the widening social inequality in Hong
Kong, and large-scale redevelopment proj-
ects are facing an increasing degree of publicdiscontents. In Manila, Choi (2016) refers tothe possibility of the gentrification of informalsettlements as a result of infrastructure upgrad-
ing, prompting us to question the relationship
between development-induced displacementShin et al. 465
and gentrification. Yip and Tran (2016) also
take a reserved position about the future of
Hanoi’s redevelopment practices, as they
anticipate the possibility of new-build gentrifi-cation if and when predatory pursuit of profitstakes over from a more equitable social
agenda.
We also retain our opening position that
gentrification as a critical conceptualisation
remains useful. There is so much to learn
from each other’s experiences in order toexplore more effective strategies to fightthreats of displacement. For instance,
Taipei, which is reportedly subject to revan-
chist urban policies may learn from Seoul orHong Kong, which provide public housingas part of in-kind compensation schemes for
eligible displacees. However, Seoul’s experi-
ence also provides a telling story of how theprovision of public housing as a fruit ofstruggles against the state could lead to theco-optation of displacees’ movements (Shin
and Kim, 2016). In fact, the case reported
by Jou et al. (2016, this issue) further sug-gests that neighbourhoods as sites of eman-cipatory and progressive politics could easily
be usurped by financial and property capital
if ‘the singular principal power of landeddeveloper interests’ are not disciplined. Theexperience of former villagers in Guangzhou
is another telling story of how important it
is for inhabitants to have full control of theneighbourhood redevelopment processinstead of being pushed over by the coalitionbetween the local state, the developer and
the village collective (Shin, 2016). Hudalah
et al. (2016) also emphasise the importanceof scrutinising the nature of Indonesia’sgrowth coalition, arguing that while the
country’s democratic transition helped the
government to consider a populist coalitionwith both capitalists and villagers, the gov-ernment–capitalist nexus had an upper handin order to achieve their common aim of
reaping benefits from gentrification. In this
regard, Vietnamese residents in Hanoi (Yipand Tran, 2016) have a lot to learn from
their neighbouring economies in order not
to lose their collective bargaining power that
has helped hinder gentrification so far.
Moreover, the usefulness of introducing
the concept of gentrification to a placewhere urbanisation and redevelopment doesnot mobilise gentrification as an analyticalconcept lies in the capacity of ‘gentrification’
to be used as a powerful discourse of socio-
political mobilisation across national bound-aries (Lees, 2014c, forthcoming). It enableslocal inhabitants of one place/country to be
readily connected with those in another
place/country, realising that their fate of dis-placement in the midst of real estate specula-tion is not a singular experience but
something that is shared by people around
the country and across the world. In EastAsia in particular, such solidarity acrossboundaries provides a possibility for effec-tive resistance against the aggressive power
of the state and capital to extract exchange
value from land and housing, a key charac-teristic of urbanisation and urban develop-ment in the Global East repeatedly
emphasised in this special issue. Indeed,
from the contributed papers, we come tounderstand that the fate of former villagersin Guangzhou (Shin, 2016) and of slum
dwellers in Seoul (Shin and Kim, 2016)
mirrors that of Taipei’s inner-city residents(Jou et al., 2016) and of Hong Kong’s resi-dents living in dilapidated buildings subjectto state-led new-build gentrification (La
Grange and Pretorius, 2016). They have all
faced the threat of displacement and of los-ing their right to stay put in the midst of theconversion of their properties into a higher
and better use, while their tenure security
saw a varying degree of protection reflectingvariegated trajectories of regulatory prac-tices and historic struggles. Such accumula-tion strategies have been central to these
economies (and elsewhere in the Global East
too) and to the retention of power by their466 Urban Studies 53(3)
political and economic elites. It is in this
regard that local inhabitants’ struggle against
gentrification and displacement, and by exten-sion their fight for collective consumption, has
an immediate political significance.
Acknowledgements
We thank all the participants in these workshops
and all the contributors to this special issue, aswell as Mark Stephens and Ruth Harkin at Urban
Studies for their help and support with this special
issue.
Funding
This special issue emerged out of a double work-shop entitled ‘Towards an emerging geography ofgentrification in the Global South’, part of theUrban Studies Seminar Series 2011–2012 funded
by the Urban Studies Foundation. The overallaim of the two workshops, one held in London,the other in Santiago in Chile, was to broaden ourunderstanding of gentrification drawing concep-tually from the ‘new’ literature on comparativeurbanism and policy mobilities and practically on
the knowledge of gentrification researchers work-
ing on/in the Global South.
