Unequal Displacement: Gentriﬁcation, Racial
Stratiﬁcation, and Residential Destinations
in Philadelphia1
Jackelyn Hwang
Stanford University
Lei Ding
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Drawing from sociological theory and research on residential mobil-
ity and neighborhood strati ﬁcation, which primarily explain urban
decline and persistent segregation, the authors propose a frameworkfor examining residential displacement in the context of gentri ﬁca-
tion. Using this framework, this study assesses how gentri ﬁcation shapes
whether and where disadvantaged residents move, using a unique large-scale consumer credit database of residents in Philadelphia from 2002to 2014. The authors ﬁnd that gentri ﬁcation ’s consequences on the res-
idential mobility patterns of ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents are
unequally distributed by the racial contexts in which gentri ﬁcation is
taking place. The authors argue that mechanisms of racial strati ﬁca-
tion that govern both the valuation of neighborhoods and neighbor-hood sorting patterns explain these differences. They also ﬁnd that gen-
triﬁcation is indirectly displacing disadvantaged residents over time.
Their analysis demonstrates how gentri ﬁcation in the 21st century is
fundamentally structured by racial strati ﬁcation and recon ﬁguring the
urban landscape and residential sorting in ways that exacerbate neigh-borhood inequality by race and class.
Large-scale economic and demographic transformations and the perpetua-
tion of discriminatory housing policies and neighborhood preferences left many
1The authors thank the AJS reviewers, Jacob Faber, David Grusky, Robert M. Hunt,
Tomás Jiménez, Douglas Massey, Ann Owens, Elizabeth Roberto, and audiences of
© 2020 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0002-9602/2020/12602-0004$10.00
354 AJSVolume 126 Number 2 (September 2020): 354 –406

inner-city and predominantly Black neighborhoods depopulated and in dire
conditions during the latter half of the 20th century (Wilson 1987; Massey
and Denton 1993). But after decades of decline, some low-income centralcity neighborhoods have gentri ﬁed—they are undergoing a socioeconomic
upgrading characterized by reinvestment and the in-migration of middle-
and upper-class residents (Smith 1998).
2Although gentri ﬁcation had been
occurring in pockets throughout large cities for several decades, its rate
and spread have increased substantially since the late 1990s (Hackworth
and Smith 2001; Hwang and Lin 2016), spurring increased public and schol-arly debate about the redistribution of disadvantaged urban residents (At-
kinson 2004).
Sociological theory and research on residential mobility and neighbor-
hood strati ﬁcation underscore how race-based neighborhood preferences
and racially strati ﬁed residential sorting are central to explaining the de-
cline of urban neighborhoods and cities, White ﬂight and White residents ’
avoidance of central city (particularly minority) neighborhoods, and persis-
tent segregation. These mechanisms may have served well for explaining
much of the 20th century, but the intensi ﬁcation and spread of gentri ﬁca-
tion, particularly to Black urban neighborhoods, implies a fundamental
shift in neighborhood preferences and sorting. Whether and how these pro-
cesses apply to gentri ﬁcation and its consequences requires further empiri-
cal analysis of who can stay, who moves out, who can move in, and where
people can move in general as neighborhoods gentrify.
Numerous studies employing a range of methods have examined whether
and how gentri ﬁcation leads to residential displacement, producing a mixed
set of results and overall conclusions (Brown-Saracino 2017). Qualitative
accounts tend to document the unscrupulous ways low-income residentsin gentrifying neighborhoods, particula rly minority neighborhoods, are forced
out of their homes and priced out of their gentrifying neighborhoods. In
these accounts, middle- and upper-class newcomers arrive, businesses turn
2Although there is no clear consensus in the literature over the de ﬁnition of gentri ﬁca-
tion, we use this broad conceptualization, which generally aligns with most research
and does not assume residential displacement or racial turnover for which evidence is
mixed.various workshops, seminars, and conferences for their helpful feedback. This researchwas supported in part by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development of the National Institutes of Health (grant T32HD007163). The
views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily re ﬂect the views
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Institutes of Health. Direct correspondence to Jackelyn Hwang, Department of Sociology,
450 Jane Stanford Way, Building 120, Stanford, California 94305. E-mail: jihwang@
stanford.eduUnequal Displacement
355

over, housing prices soar, neighborhoods whiten, all resulting in communi-
ties becoming “lost ”and their cultural histories erased (e.g., Wellman 1979,
p. 1204; Zukin 2010; Hyra 2014). Yet quantitative inquiries produce weakor no evidence that disadvantaged or minority residents in gentrifying neigh-
borhoods move more, in general or involuntarily, than they would if they
lived in lower-income neighborhoods that do not gentrify (e.g., Freeman2005; McKinnish, Walsh, and White 2010; Ellen and O ’Regan 2011; Ding,
Hwang, and Divringi 2016; Martin and Beck 2018). Nor do quantitative
studies ﬁnd that gentri ﬁcation disproportionately occurs in minority, espe-
cially predominantly Black, neighborhoods (e.g., Owens 2012; Hwang and
Sampson 2014). While gentri ﬁcation is increasingly occurring in minority,
including Black, neighborhoods compared to the past (Owens 2012; Free-man and Cai 2015), gentri ﬁcation is not the dominant trend in these neigh-
borhoods. Some scholars have even concluded that the portrayal of gentri-
ﬁcation ’s negative consequences for low-income and minority residents is
“overstated ”(Brown-Saracino 2017, p. 526).
We argue that the existing research on gentri ﬁcation has taken a limited
view of residential displacement that focuses on whether residents move (for
a review, see Carlson 2020). This focus obscures the complex reality of res-
idential mobility, particularly among disadvantaged residents. Socioeconom-
ically disadvantaged residents often experience forced moves regardless ofgentri ﬁcation, resulting from exploitative landlords and ﬁnancial instability
(Desmond 2016), while those in gentrifying neighborhoods may try to stay
as long as possible (Freeman 2006; Ellen and O ’Regan 2011). Residents in
both gentrifying and nongentrifying ne ighborhoods also make planned moves,
which are often upward, when the opportunity arises (Rossi 1980; DeLuca,
Garboden, and Rosenblatt 2013). Such opportunities may be more likely ingentrifying neighborhoods where increasing values allow some to cash out.
Thus, gentri ﬁcation can serve as a mechanism that exacerbates ﬁnancial dis-
advantage for some as costs rise, inducing an involuntary and constrainedmove. But gentri ﬁcation can also induce an upward move, providing ﬁnan-
cial advantage to others.
Perhaps more importantly, focusing e xclusively on whether residents move
ignores the context of racial strati ﬁcation that imbues the housing market,
from the valuation of neighborhoods to discriminatory practices by landlords
and realtors, to informational differences that lead to strati ﬁed neighborhood
destinations (Logan and Molotch 1987; Massey and Denton 1993; Charles
2003; Sampson and Sharkey 2008; Krysan and Crowder 2018). Despite gen-
triﬁcation ’s increasing prevalence in predominantly Black neighborhoods
relative to the past (Owens 2012; Freeman and Cai 2015), gentri ﬁcation is
slower and residents more vulnerable to exploitative landlords in these
neighborhoods (Pattillo 2007; Hwang and Sampson 2014; Desmond andShollenberger 2015). Thus, while some residents may make voluntary orAmerican Journal of Sociology
356

planned moves as a result of the dynamics of gentri ﬁcation and others may
make involuntary moves, the constraints of these moves likely differ across
neighborhoods and their residents by race.
In this study, we expand the analytical purview of residential displace-
ment to examine where disadvantaged residents move when they move —
from both within and outside of gentrifying neighborhoods. In doing so,our analysis offers a clearer view of the consequences of gentri ﬁcation on
residential outcomes. Given the compounding evidence showing that living
in disadvantaged neighborhoods can have detrimental effects on individu-als’life chances (Sharkey and Faber 2014), the destination of movers from
gentrifying neighborhoods bears out the material consequences of gentri ﬁca-
tion in full. Moreover, knowing where disadvantaged movers —including
movers from beyond gentrifying neighborhoods —e n du pa l l o w sf o ra na s s e s s -
ment of whether and how gentri ﬁcation is restructuring the economic space of
cities and surrounding areas as gentrifying neighborhoods become unafford-able and shift where disadvantaged movers end up (Newman and Wyly
2006; Davidson 2008; Sampson and Sharkey 2008).
The fact that the residential destinations of movers has been overlooked
in the empirical research on gentri ﬁcation is partly due data limitations.
Drawing on a large-scale restricted consumer credit database of more than
50,000 randomly sampled adult residents with ﬁnancial credit records in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, from 2002 to 2014, this study is the ﬁrst to our
knowledge to empirically examine how gentri ﬁcation is associated with whether
and where disadvantaged residents move and whether this relationshipvaries across the neighborhood racial contexts in which gentri ﬁcation is tak-
ing place.
We demonstrate that gentri ﬁcation ’s consequences on the residential mo-
bility patterns of ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents in Philadelphia are
unequally distributed by neighborhood racial composition. Financially dis-
advantaged residents in gentrifying census tracts —characterized by high
inﬂuxes of higher socioeconomic status (SES) residents and high increases
in housing prices —do not move more often than those in nongentrifying
tracts across neighborhood racial compositions. However, ﬁnancially disad-
vantaged movers from once predominantly Black gentrifying tracts, which
comprise half of the gentrifying tracts in Philadelphia, tend to end up in more
disadvantaged tracts than where those moving from other gentrifying tractsend up, and they end up in similar neighborhoods to those moving from non-
gentrifying tracts. In other words, ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents who move
from tracts that were not predominantly Black bene ﬁt from gentri ﬁcation
in terms of locational attainment, whereas those moving from once predom-
inantly Black tracts do not. We also show that ﬁnancially disadvantaged in-
dividuals moving to and within the city are increasingly likely over time toend up in disadvantaged tracts that are not experiencing gentri ﬁcation. ThisUnequal Displacement
357

pattern of intracity residential mobility re ﬂects how gentri ﬁcation reduces
the overall pool of neighborhoods accessible to ﬁnancially disadvantaged
residents within the city.
These ﬁndings bring the consequences of gentri ﬁcation in the 21st century
into fuller focus. Gentri ﬁcation is recon ﬁguring the urban landscape by shrink-
ing residential options within cities for disadvantaged residents and expand-ingthem for more advantagedresidents. Because mechanisms ofracial strat-
iﬁcation continue to govern both the valuation of neighborhoods and
residential sorting patterns, the bene ﬁt of gentri ﬁcation as a mechanism of
ﬁnancial advantage disproportionately accrues to those in non-Black gentri-
fying neighborhoods, providing access to a broader set of neighborhoods,
while those from Black gentrifying tracts are relegated to less advantagedneighborhoods and face fewer options within the city —exhibiting similar
mobility patterns as other disadvantaged residents from nongentrifying neigh-
borhoods. Taken together, our ﬁndings show how the consequences of gentri-
ﬁcation are fundamentally structured by racial strati ﬁcation and help ex-
plain how gentri ﬁcation is a mechanism that restructures residential sorting
in racialized ways that exacerbate neighborhood inequality by race and classin cities today.
RESIDENTIAL MOBILITY, NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE,
AND RACIAL STRATIFICATION
The neighborhood changes associated with the spread of gentri ﬁcation have
stimulated a growing body of research on its consequences, particularly sur-
rounding residential displacement (Atkinson 2004).3Despite the rapid growth
in scholarship on the topic, studies, particularly those using quantitative
approaches, do not ﬁnd consistent empirical evidence that gentri ﬁcation
is associated with higher rates of moving out of a neighborhood in generalor involuntarily. However, insights from qualitative accounts and surveys
of gentri ﬁcation ’s consequences on residential mobility, research on the
residential instability of the urban poor, and scholarship on neighborhoodsorting and racial strati ﬁcation highlight the complexity of residential mobil-
ity. We draw on this research to guide our framework for improving our
understanding of gentri ﬁcation ’s consequences.
3Important consequences associated with displacement examined by others include ad-
ditional ﬁnancial burdens for residents (Newman and Wyly 2006); social, cultural, and
political displacement and exclusion (Anderson 1990; Martin 2007; Zukin 2010; Hyra
2014); and the displacement of businesses, amenities, and land use (Marcuse 1986; David-
son 2008).American Journal of Sociology
358

Gentri ﬁcation and Residential Mobility
Qualitative accounts document the various ways by which residential dis-
placement takes place in gentrifying neighborhoods: formal processes such
as eviction or tax foreclosure, housing demolition or ownership conversion
of rental units, landlord neglect or harassment, ﬁnancial inducements offered
by landlords or developers to entice existing residents to leave, or household
decisions in response to rising costs and ﬁnancial hardship (Marcuse 1986;
Newman and Wyly 2006; Brown-Saracino 2017). These different scenariosunderscore the fact that the distinction between forced and voluntary moves
resulting from gentri ﬁcation can be unclear. Before a neighborhood begins
gentrifying, residents may have purchased or inherited homes when valueswere cheap, while others may have been paying low rents to build wealth
to eventually move elsewhere. As housing values increase with gentri ﬁca-
tion, some households may be able to take advantage of the increased neigh-borhood value to sell their homes for a large pro ﬁt or by receiving payouts
from developers or landlords, who may be incentivized to rehabilitate prop-
erties to take advantage of larger potential pro ﬁts. Thus, for some households,
gentri ﬁcation can serve as a pathway to upward locational attainment. In this
scenario, moves are both forced by gentri ﬁcation yet voluntary, planned, and
potentially bene ﬁcial. As with most existing data, including ours, capturing
the circumstances of moves is limited (for an exception, see Desmond and
Shollenberger [2015]). Earlier studies on gentri ﬁcation and displacement use
survey data asking whether moves were involuntary (e.g., Freeman 2005),but these data lack speci ﬁc information to distinguish among the complexity
of circumstances associated with gentri ﬁcation described above.
Other studies suggest that poor residents in gentrifying neighborhoods
may be more inclined to stay in their neighborhoods. Surveys and interviews
reveal that lower-SES and long-term households in gentrifying neighbor-
hoods report higher levels of neighborhood satisfaction, which may explainwhy households try to stay if they can (Freeman 2006; Ellen and O ’Regan
2011). Studies show how disadvantaged residents stay in gentrifying neigh-
borhoods because many have housing subsidies; other residents increase thenumber of people living in a housing unit or employ other strategies to bear
the increased costs (Freeman 2006; Newman and Wyly 2006; Ellen and
O’Regan 2011). Finally, some long-term, low-SES residents are homeown-
ers who purchased or inherited their homes when values were cheap, and
thus they have more protections from rising costs than renters (Ding et al.
2016; Martin and Beck 2018). Thus, most of the neighborhood-level demo-graphic changes in gentrifying neighborhoods re ﬂect the in ﬂux of higher-
SES and predominantly White residents ﬁlling vacant units, including new
construction, rather than the out-migration of lower-SES residents (Freeman2005; McKinnish et al. 2010; Ellen and O ’Regan 2011).Unequal Displacement
359

Residential Instability among the Urban Poor
Recent research documenting the residential instability of the urban poor
shows that disadvantaged residents in urban neighborhoods move relatively
often regardless of gentri ﬁcation (Desmond 2016). Desmond (2016) demon-
strates how processes like eviction and landlord harassment and neglect oc-cur often in poor urban neighborhoods. Thus, out-migration rates among
disadvantaged residents in nongentrifying neighborhoods —the comparison
group—may be exceptionally high because many of these neighborhoods are
among the poorest, where disadvantaged residents frequently experience
residential instability (Newman and Wyly 2006). Insights from works by
DeLuca et al. (2013) and Desmond and Shollenberger (2015) point to the im-portance of where residents move for understanding the constraints of res-
idential mobility for disadvantaged residents. While some residents make
voluntary and planned moves to better neighborhoods, minority and disad-
vantaged residents are more likely to move under forced circumstances, result-
ing in moves to neighborhoods with similar or worse quality compared to
their origin neighborhood.
Residential Mobility and Racial Strati ﬁcation
Even when making voluntary and planned moves, some residents, partic-
ularly racial minorities, may end up in similar or worse quality neighbor-
hoods because of place strati ﬁcation processes. Although race and ethnicity
are central to the public discourse and debates on gentri ﬁcation and dis-
placement, surprisingly few studies on the subject systematically consider
residential strati ﬁcation by race. Place strati ﬁcation perspectives argue that
residential sorting patterns re ﬂect racial inequalities that are not fully ex-
plained by socioeconomic indicators. Predominantly Black neighborhoods
are consistently preferred less and valued lower than neighborhoods with
greater shares of White residents (Charles 2003). Further, Black and Whiteresidents, net of socioeconomic differences, persistently tend to move to and
from neighborhoods with starkly different social and economic conditions
and racial and ethnic compositions from each other (Sampson and Sharkey2008; Crowder, Pais, and South 2012). Crowder and South (2005) ﬁnd that
Black residents are substantially more likely than White residents to move
from nonpoor to poor census tracts and less likely to move from poor to non-poor census tracts. Explanations for such differences include distinct pref-
erences among the housing and neighborhood options available, the ability
to realize such preferences because of discriminatory processes throughoutvarious aspects of the housing market, and the information that residents
have on these options through social networks or realtors (Charles 2003;
Crowder et al. 2012; Krysan and Crowder 2018).American Journal of Sociology
360

Historically, gentri ﬁcation in predominantly minority neighborhoods,
particularly African-American neighborhoods, was relatively rare and in-
stead more likely to occur in racially and ethnically diverse neighborhoodsor those with fewer shares of Black residents (Freeman 2009; Hwang and
Sampson 2014; Bader and Warkentien 2016). However, gentri ﬁcation is
more likely to occur in predominantly Black neighborhoods in recent de-cades compared with the past (Owens 2012; Freeman and Cai 2015), al-
though gentri ﬁcation in these neighborhoods may be slower or stagnant
(Hwang and Sampson 2014). Nonetheless, gentri ﬁcation ’s increasing occur-
rence in once predominantly Black neighborhoods presents potentially dis-
tinct implications for disadvantaged residents in these neighborhoods,
given the racialized structure of the housing market faced by minorities andof how Black neighborhoods are valued. Indeed, ethnographic accounts of
gentri ﬁcation in minority neighborhoods show that low-income minority res-
idents experience distinct challenges associated with their marginal positionsin society. In Latino neighborhoods in Chicago, for example, Betancur (2011)
highlights how gentri ﬁcation destroyed place-based networks and institu-
tions on which racial and ethnic minorities rely for social support and oppor-tunities, causing many low-SES Latinos to disperse to other disadvantaged
neighborhoods. Pattillo (2007) portrays a similar vulnerability among disad-
vantaged, long-term Black residents in a predominantly Black Chicagoneighborhood gentri ﬁed by middle-class Black residents.
Our data do not contain information on individuals ’race, but we can ex-
amine whether the residential mobility patterns from gentrifying censustracts differ by their racial composition. Disadvantaged residents in gentri-
fying tracts with fewer shares of Black residents may be better positioned
than other ﬁnancially disadvantaged movers either to stay in their tracts
or to take advantage of increased housing values and wealth building to
move upward, despite moving in response to gentri ﬁcation. Yet, disadvan-
taged residents who move from Black gentrifying tracts may be subject toless favorable circumstances. For example, their neighborhoods may be val-
ued less, thus providing them with lower cash offers to move, or landlords
and developers may engage in more exploitative practices in these neigh-borhoods to drive disadvantaged residents out as they gentrify. Further,
if the movers from predominantly Black neighborhoods are indeed Black,
they may also experience discrimination in the housing market or havedistinct constraints that lead them to sort into disadvantaged tracts, regard-
less of whether their moves were voluntary or planned (Sampson and Sharkey
2008; Crowder et al. 2012; Desm ond and Shollenberger 2015).
While we cannot distinguish whether and to what extent racialized mech-
anisms are occurring at the individual or tract level in this study, our anal-
ysis provides a necessary step to further our understanding of gentri ﬁcation ’sUnequal Displacement
361

consequences. To our knowledge, McKinnish et al. ’s (2010) analysis of gen-
triﬁcation and displacement from 1990 to 2000 is the only quantitative study
that examines differences between Black and non-Black tracts. Their studydid not examine residents ’destinations and took place when gentri ﬁcation in
Black neighborhoods was less prevalent, and they do not ﬁnd elevated rates
of out-migration among low-SES or Black residents in Black gentrifyingtracts.
Altogether, prior research on gentri ﬁcation and displacement has focused
primarily on two trajectories for disadvantaged residents in gentrifyingneighborhoods —staying or moving —but moves can differ in important ways.
Whether moving as a function of gentri ﬁcation is forced or voluntary is not
clear-cut, but knowing where disadvantaged residents end up when theymove provides a clearer view of the consequences of gentri ﬁcation. Due to
limited data, only a few studies, to our knowledge, have examined where
residents from gentrifying neighborhoods move (Freeman 2005; Newmanand Wyly 2006; Ding et al. 2016). Freeman (2005) examined whether resi-
dents move within or outside of their census tracts using data from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) but did not examine character-istics of residents ’destinations. Newman and Wyly (2006) examined sub-
borough destinations in New York City, which have populations greater than
100,000, of residents who reported being displaced, but these geographiesare too large to assess the implications of the destinations of residents. Fi-
nally, Ding et al. (2016) use similar data to our study ’s to assess out-migration
rates and whether ﬁnancially disadvantaged movers are more likely to move
to a tract in a lower quintile of median household income than their origin
tract. While informative, because nongentrifying tracts are in low-income
quintiles, it is not surprising that they ﬁnd that residents in these tracts
are less likely than movers from gentrifying tracts to move to tracts with
lower-income quintiles than their origin. Thus, our understanding of how
gentri ﬁcation affects residential strati ﬁcation remains limited from these
analyses.
Residential Sorting and Neighborhood Strati ﬁcation
Most research on residential mobility and gentri ﬁcation has focused on in-
dividual processes, but the aggregate consequence of residential ﬂows asso-
ciated with gentri ﬁcation has implications for broader patterns of residential
strati ﬁcation (Sampson and Sharkey 2008). Gentri ﬁcation implies a restruc-
turing of the economic space of cities. Scholars have argued that gentri ﬁca-
tion can indirectly displace residents by reducing affordable neighborhood
options for all disadvantaged residents (Newman and Wyly 2006; DavidsonAmerican Journal of Sociology
362

2008; Slater 2009). As a result, ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents who re-
main in the city are increasingly concentrated in a reduced set of afford-
able neighborhoods. This can also increase the suburbanization of poverty(Kneebone and Berube 2013).
The increased concentration of disadvantaged residents in fewer neigh-
borhoods within the city, coupled with increasing af ﬂuence in gentrifying
neighborhoods, increases inequality between neighborhoods at the bottom
of the hierarchy and the rest of a city ’s neighborhoods. Thus, even if disad-
vantaged individuals do not move more frequently from gentrifying neigh-borhoods relative to nongentrifying neighborhoods, as studies consistently
ﬁnd, residential sorting among disadvantaged movers associated with the
spread of gentri ﬁcation can result in emergent patterns of neighborhood in-
equality within a city and new dynamics of inequality within the suburbs.
To our knowledge, no studies on gentri ﬁcation have examined this broader
process of indirect displacement with information on where residents moveas gentri ﬁcation spreads.
THE CURRENT STUDY
Our study aims to expand our understanding of the consequences of urban
neighborhood change in cities today by proposing a broader framework forexamining displacement in the context of gentri ﬁcation. First, we argue that
the implications of gentri ﬁcation concern not only whether someone moves
but also the characteristics of where that person moves. Given that gentri-ﬁcation can provide ﬁnancial advantage to some but exacerbate ﬁnancial
disadvantage for others, where individual households move sheds light
on the material consequences of gentri ﬁcation in full. Second, we theorize
that gentri ﬁcation and displacement are embedded in a racially strati ﬁed
housing market. Third, we propose that the consequences of gentri ﬁcation
on residential strati ﬁcation also concern residential mobility patterns of res-
idents beyond those in gentrifying neighborhoods. Gentri ﬁcation ’s effect on
individuals ’residential mobility patterns in turn affect broader patterns of
neighborhood inequality. This framework guides our analysis.
Given prior research on gentri ﬁcation, displacement, and residential mo-
bility, we expect that ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents are equally or
more likely to stay in gentrifying tracts relative to disadvantaged residentsfrom nongentrifying tracts. We also expect those from gentrifying tracts to
end up in neighborhoods similar to those of disadvantaged residents mov-
ing from nongentrifying tracts because the literature on residential instabilityamong the urban poor suggests that ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents
from gentrifying tracts will tend to move downward, whereas residents from
nongentrifying tracts will tend to churn among poor neighborhoods. It is alsoUnequal Displacement
363

plausible that residents from gentrifying tracts will tend to move upward, as
they are more likely to cash in on the increased value of gentrifying neighbor-
hoods and will therefore end up in more advantaged neighborhoods than dothose from nongentrifying tracts.
While disadvantaged residents from both gentrifying and nongentrifying
tracts may often move under unfavorable circumstances and end up in dis-advantaged neighborhoods, we expect to ﬁnd heterogeneity in the residen-
tial mobility patterns depending on where residents move from following
prior research on residential strati ﬁcation by race. Speci ﬁcally, we expect that
ﬁnancially disadvantaged movers from gentrifying tracts that have lower
shares of Black residents will have lower likelihoods of moving, and, among
movers, they will move to better neighborhoods compared to those movingfrom tracts that were once predominantly Black and to those moving from
nongentrifying tracts. Finally, we hypothesize that indirect displacement is
occurring, such that ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents in general who
are moving to or within the city are increasingly less likely to move to gen-
trifying tracts and increasingly more likely to move to nongentrifying tracts
compared to other tracts over time.
Credit Scores and Residential Strati ﬁcation
Our analysis focuses on residential mobility patterns among ﬁnancially dis-
advantaged residents, as measured by credit scores. Credit scores are a mea-
sure of an individual ’s ability to pay debt without defaulting and serve as
an increasingly important and often overlooked dimension of strati ﬁcation,
particularly in the housing market (Poon 2009; Wherry, Seefeldt, and Al-
varez 2019). Although credit scores were originally used to screen loan ap-plicants, banks now use them to stratify credit offerings, loan products, and
interest rates. In addition, a variety of institutions beyond banks increasingly
rely on credit scores for assessing the worthiness and responsibility of indi-viduals: employers use credit scores to screen job applicants, landlords use
them to screen tenants, and insurance companies use them to calculate prices
(Mester 1997; Fellowes 2006; Poon 2009; Wherry et al. 2019). For under-standing residential displacement in the context of gentri ﬁcation, low credit
scores, as well as the lack of a credit score, re ﬂectﬁnancial disadvantage and
serve as a good gauge of vulnerability to displacement. If the primary mech-anism of gentri ﬁcation-induced displacement is increased cost burdens, then
those with low or missing credit scores are more likely to feel the conse-
quences of these cost burdens and face further limitations in housing searchesif they move.
Credit bureaus incorporate a variety of factors that relate to loan perfor-
mance to compute credit scores, including previous payment history, out-standing debts, length of credit history, new accounts opened, and typesAmerican Journal of Sociology
364

of credit used (Federal Reserve Board 2007; Fair Isaac Corporation 2015).
Delinquency, large increases in one ’s debt, and events of public record (e.g.,
bankruptcy or foreclosure) often lead to low credit scores (Anderson 2007). Be-cause the age of accounts is positively associated with credit scores, younger
adults generally have lower scores than older ones, but the other factors have
much greater in ﬂuence in determining credit scores (Fair Isaac Corporation
2015). While credit bureaus do not factor race, gender, or income into the cal-
culations, they correlate highly with race and income levels (Bostic, Calem,
and Wachter 2005; Brevoort, Grimm, and Kambara 2016; Wherry et al.2019). Nonetheless, individuals with low credit scores may span the income
or wealth distributions, and low scores better re ﬂect individuals ’ability to
bear ﬁnancial burdens. For example, Mester (1997) found that credit scores
better predict foreclosure than income. Thus, credit scores represent a novel
and distinct dimension of SES that can also limit or expand opportunities for
individuals, particularly in the housing market.
Credit records, however, exclude individuals who do not have Social Se-
curity numbers (SSNs; e.g., noncitizens and unauthorized immigrants) or
a credit history —approximately 26 million Americans, or one in 10 adults
(Brevoort et al. 2016). While Wherry et al. (2019) estimate that 45 million
U.S. adults do not have any credit score, nearly half of these adults are rep-
resented in our data. Credit records include anyone with a past foreclosure orbankruptcy or individuals whose ﬁles only consist of closed or authorized
user accounts. These individuals are often lower-income consumers and typ-
ically have missing scores, which indicates a “thin ”ﬁle—aﬁle containing very
few accounts or new credit such that there is too little information to estimate
a score (Brevoort et al. 2016, p. 26). Despite the advantages of credit records
for capturing ﬁnancial disadvantage and residential histories, these data dis-
proportionately exclude low-SES residents; thus, our analysis likely underes-
timates the extent to which gentri ﬁcation affects low-SES residents ’mobility
patterns.
Research Setting
Our study is a case study of Philadelphia. Given the heterogeneity across
housing and labor markets and policies and the complexity of each one
(Crowder et al. 2012), a case study of a single city allows us to carefully in-terpret and explain residential mobility patterns associated with gentri ﬁca-
tion. A national analysis that controls for unobserved heterogeneity across
cities can obfuscate important processes and inhibit our ability to under-stand what processes are at work. By focusing on a single city, we can also
identify gentri ﬁcation more reliably and check our measures against local
knowledge and city-speci ﬁc data. Operationalizing gentri ﬁcation has been
notoriously challenging in the gentri ﬁcation literature, especially becauseUnequal Displacement
365

gentri ﬁcation has distinct characteristics across different cities and over time.
Applying uniform criteria does not always capture areas undergoing similar
changes or experiencing the socioeconomic transformations that are consis-tent with local understandings and qualitative depictions of gentri ﬁcation
(Wyly and Hammel 1999; Owens 2012; Barton 2016). Because our data set
contains more than 50,000 adult residents in the city of Philadelphia alone —
a major advantage of our data set over other longitudinal data sets with geo-
graphic information, such as the PSID —it provides us with the necessary
statistical power to examine residential mobility patterns associated withgentri ﬁcation within a single city and to stratify across various subpopula-
tions within census tracts.
Philadelphia is well suited for a study of gentri ﬁcation and residential
mobility patterns. Not only does much of the sociological literature on res-
idential strati ﬁcation and segregation examine Philadelphia itself (e.g., Du
Bois 1899; Anderson 1990; Hunter 2013), Philadelphia also shares manysimilarities with other cities featured prominently in this literature. Phila-
delphia experienced large-scale socioeconomic and population declines dur-
ing the latter half of the 20th century, leaving many inner-city neighbor-hoods with high vacancy and poverty rates and ripe for redevelopment
(Smith 1996). Like other cities with similar histories of urban growth and
decline, Philadelphia has a substantial share of Black residents, comprising44% of the population in 2016 and the largest racial group in the city, and
very high levels of Black-White segregation (Massey and Denton 1993). In
recent decades, especially since 2000, gentri ﬁcation has expanded and accel-
erated in many Philadelphia neighborhoods abetted by property tax pro-
grams, a vibrant central business distric t, and strong anchor institutions (e.g.,
Drexel University, Temple University, University of Pennsylvania; Gillenand Westrum 2014). Despite housing price declines and slowed construction
during the Great Recession, gentri ﬁcation has continued to spread (Pew
Charitable Trusts 2011).
4Philadelphia is not experiencing the extreme
housing demand and price increases of the handful of cities with more lim-
ited housing supply, like San Francisco or New York City, but gentri ﬁca-
tion has now spread well beyond the handful of “superstar cities ”(Gyourko,
Mayer, and Sinai 2013, p. 167) over the last 20 years to Philadelphia and
other cities with looser housing markets that have formed the basis for urban
sociological theory and research (Hwang and Lin 2016).
Philadelphia, nonetheless, has some unique characteristics that may lower
the degree to which disadvantaged residents move compared to other cities.
4The Philadelphia metropolitan area experienced a relatively low foreclosure rate during
the housing crisis compared with other large metropolitan areas (Pew Charitable Trusts
2011).American Journal of Sociology
366

First, Philadelphia has a high vacancy rate relative to other large U.S. cities
(Capperis, Ellen, and Karfunkel 2015), although a recent report found sharp
declines in low-cost rental units in gentrifying neighborhoods in Philadelphiafrom 2000 to 2014 (Chizeck 2017). In addition, before 2014, the city had not
assessed its properties, particularly older ones, for decades, which allowed
long-term homeowners in gentrifying neighborhoods to avoid property taxincreases.
5Finally, Philadelphia has a historically high home ownership rate
relative to other large cities (Capperis et al. 2015).
DATA AND MEASURES
Our data come from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York/Equifax Con-
sumer Credit Panel (CCP). These restricted data provide quarterly informa-
tion on individuals ’year of birth; credit characteristics; and the quantity,
balance, and payment activity of mortgages and other credit accounts fromJune 2002 to June 2014 for an anonymized 5% random sample of adult con-
sumers with SSNs and a credit history —having at least one public record
(e.g., bankruptcy or foreclosure) or at least one credit account currently re-ported with Equifax (Lee and van der Klaauw 2010).
6Most importantly
for our study, the data provide individuals ’census tracts (based on Census
2000 boundaries). The data, however, do not provide important demographicinformation, such as race, ethnicity, and income. While other longitudinal
data sets, such as the PSID, contain richer demographic information, they
have limited samples within cities and neighborhoods.
The CCP data are designed to provide a representative sample of individ-
ual consumers across the nation in any given quarter. Thus, younger indi-
viduals who develop credit histories and new immigrants are generally added,and older consumers who die, emigrate from the United States, or have a pro-
longed period of inactivity are generally dropped. Approximately 1% –3% of
consumers are dropped from the panel, while a similar share of consumers isadded each year. Because of this data structure and our focus on Philadel-
phia, we do not examine residential stability for the same individual over
5Any effects from the city ’s tax programs implemented in 2014 are beyond the period of
our analysis.
6The CCP data begin in 1999, but we begin our analysis in June 2002 because Wardrip
and Hunt (2013) found that the geographic information before 2002 was less precise. Files
of consumers with one of ﬁve numbers in the last two digits of their SSN are selected into
the sample. The data that Equifax makes available to researchers do not include actual
SSNs or any other identifying information, such as names, full addresses, or demograph-
ics (apart from age). About 5% of households have multiple adults in the CCP sample;
results are similar when we exclude individuals in the same household.Unequal Displacement
367

a longer period for this study. Instead, we construct our analytic data set by
considering each year of CCP data as a separate cohort for which we observe
mobility over an interval of one year. This strategy mitigates the potentialbias introduced by the attrition and adjustment of the study sample. Our an-
alytic sample consists of 517,429 person-years for residents living in the city
of Philadelphia at any point in 2002 –13.
7
Compared with estimates in Philadelphia from the ACS, the population
size and age distribution are similar, particularly for individuals between 25
and 65 years old. Because the sampling universe of these data excludes in-dividuals with no credit history, the ACS population estimates for those
younger than 25 years are larger than the CCP estimates, and the CCP es-
timates are slightly higher for individuals older than 65 years, which is likelybecause ﬁles for recently deceased individuals have not yet been removed.
We exclude individuals younger than 25 years and older than 84 years in
our analysis. This exclusion also ensures that we do not include college-age residents who are highly residentially mobile and often live in gentrifying
areas associated with universities.
8We present results including populations
that are 65 –84 years old because studies suggest that older individuals may
experience displacement from gentri ﬁcation (Henig 1981), but results are
similar in separate analyses that exclude these individuals and that include
18–24-year-olds.
The CCP data report the Equifax Risk Score (hereafter, the Score) —a
proprietary credit score estimating the likelihood that an individual will re-
pay his or her debts without defaulting. The Score ranges from 280 to 850,with a low Score indicating lower ﬁnancial health.
9Our main subgroup of
interest is residents with Scores below 580 —a commonly used cutoff in
credit underwriting that captures ﬁnancially unstable residents —and indi-
viduals who are in the data but do not have Scores.10We group individuals
without Scores with low-Score residents in the analysis since having no or
few credit accounts generally indicates ﬁnancial instability (Calem, Gillen,
and Wachter 2004). Among our sample, 26.6% have Scores below 580, and
10.1% do not have Scores. The distribution of residents with low or missing
7We excluded data from 2004 because the mobility rate in that year was abnormally high
compared with other years and with estimates from the American Community Survey
(ACS), which is likely due to a change in the internal geocoding system made by the data
vendor in 2004.
8Because we do not have information on individuals ’school enrollment status, our anal-
ysis may include students who are age 25 years and older.
9The three major credit bureaus —Equifax, Transunion, and Experian —collect con-
sumer information independently and produce credit scores using various scoring mod-
els. While the scores are similar, they use slightly different scales.
10For example, the of ﬁcial minimum FICO score cutoff for low down-payment products
for a Federal Housing Administration loan is 580 (see http://archives.hud.gov/news
/2010/pr10-016.cfm).American Journal of Sociology
368

Scores (we refer to this group as low-Score residents hereafter) in our sample
across gentri ﬁable census tracts is higher in socioeconomically disadvan-
taged tracts and those with higher shares of Black residents.
Measuring Gentri ﬁcation
For this study and consistent with characterizations in the literature, we con-
ceptualize gentri ﬁcation as a socioeconomic transformation composed of
both an in ﬂux of residents with relatively higher SES and an increase in
housing prices in previously low-income central city neighborhoods.11We
construct a measure of gentri ﬁcation with 2000 decennial U.S. census data
and ACS 2009 –13ﬁve-year estimates for census tracts located in the city of
Philadelphia. We use census tracts as our unit of analysis for uniformity
across our multiple data sets. We harmonized these data to the Census 2000
tract boundaries using the method employed by Brown University ’s Longi-
tudinal Tract Data Base, which uses both population and areal weighting.
We exclude 16 census tracts with fewer t han 50 residents or with no housing
units during the period of the analysis, re sulting in a sample of 365 census tracts.
The year 2000 is our baseline, and we examine tract-level changes from
2000 to 2013.12Following existing approaches (e.g., Wyly and Hammel
1999; Freeman 2005; Ding et al. 2016), we consider tracts to be gentrifyingif they were gentri ﬁable—if they were previously relatively low-income tracts
such that they could undergo revitalization —and exhibited socioeconomic
upgrading. We categorize tracts as gentri ﬁable if they had a median house-
hold income below the citywide median household income in 2000.
13We
use only income because other indicators —such as education levels, rent, or
home values —as thresholds exclude downtown and university areas where
gentri ﬁcation is prevalent.
11Although some scholars document gentri ﬁcation in rural towns or suburbs or describe
it as a citywide phenomenon, we adhere to the classic conception of it as a central city
phenomenon occurring at the neighborhood level.
12We use 2013 hereafter, but most data are based on 2009 –13 ACS ﬁve-year estimates.
13This approach excludes neighborhoods undergoing “super-gentri ﬁcation ”(Lees 2000,
p. 398) that may have gentri ﬁed in earlier periods and had a median household income
above the citywide median in 2000. This is consistent with the working de ﬁnition of gen-
triﬁcation used in this article as a phenomenon that occurs in previously low-income, cen-
tral city neighborhoods. Nearly 80% of tracts that were gentrifying over the 10- or 20-year
periods before 2000, according to our measure, were still gentri ﬁable in 2000. We also do
not use metropolitan-wide incomes as the threshold like some studies (e.g., Freeman
2005) because, in Philadelphia, over 80% of central city tracts, including those that are
widely considered wealthy areas, fall below this threshold. We separately examined tracts
in the bottom quartile of the tract income distribution to determine whether we are onlycapturing trends among tracts that begin the period with relatively more advantage. About
half of the gentrifying tracts begin in the bottom quartile, and our substantive results are
generally similar. We note when there are differences, and results are available on request.Unequal Displacement
369

We consider a tract to be gentrifying if it experienced a percentage in-
crease above the median increase across all of the city ’s tracts in either its
median gross rent or median home value and an increase above the medianincrease across the city ’s tracts in its share of college-educated residents.
14
We consider gentri ﬁable tracts that do not meet these criteria as nongen-
trifying . We require shifts in both house prices and residents, to avoid cat-
egorizing tracts as gentrifying with housing price spillovers but without de-
mographic changes. We also include changes in either housing values or
rents because both measures re ﬂect shifts in various amenities and invest-
ment in a tract, but shifts in one dimension do not always occur in step with
the other.15We include shifts in the educational status of the population
over 25 years old because this better re ﬂects the in ﬂux of young profession-
als often associated with gentri ﬁcation compared with other measures such
as household income, particularly for artists, nonpro ﬁt workers, and youn-
ger workers with lower paying jobs (Ley 1996). Education status also bettercaptures the in ﬂux of new residents rather than incumbent upward mobility
(Freeman 2005).
Figure 1 displays a map of Philadelphia and identi ﬁes tracts that were
gentrifying, nongentrifying, and nongentri ﬁable during 2000 –2013. Of the
365 census tracts in our analysis, 184 were gentri ﬁable in 2000, of which 56
were gentrifying. The map also distinguishes census tracts that were morethan 50% Black from those that were less than 50% Black in 2000. We pre-
sent results only distinguishing between Black and non-Black tracts because,
while the Latino and Asian populations have grown substantially since 2000in Philadelphia, there are few predominantly Latino and Asian tracts. Of
the 184 gentri ﬁable tracts, 109 of these tracts were more than 50% Black
in 2000, and 75 were not. Of the tracts that were over 50% Black, 28 weregentrifying according to our measure; the other 28 gentrifying tracts were
less than 50% Black in 2000. Thus, 25.7% (28 of 109) of predominantly
Black low-income tracts gentri ﬁed, while 37.3% (28 of 75) of non-Black
low-income tracts gentri ﬁed. This is consistent with quantitative scholar-
ship that ﬁnds that gentri ﬁcation is less likely in Black neighborhoods com-
pared to others. Nonetheless, 50% of gentrifying tracts are predominantlyBlack, and, given the historical persistence of neglect and disinvestment
14Alternative measures that use metropolitan-wide median increases as thresholds or
include tracts with percentage increases in income above the citywide median produce
similar results. We also considered various stages and rates of gentri ﬁcation. Our main
results are qualitatively similar for tracts that are experiencing more rapid rates of gen-
triﬁcation or that have been gentrifying since before 2000, which both capture tracts in
the more advanced stages of gentri ﬁcation. These results are available on request.
15Indeed, only about one-third of gentri ﬁable tracts experience both substantial increases
in rents and home values over the period. In gentri ﬁable tracts in Philadelphia, median
home values increased at faster rates than median rents.American Journal of Sociology
370

in predominantly Black tracts, its substantial presence across gentrifying
tracts make this phenomenon notable in the public sphere. Black andnon-Black tracts in our sample are generally divided into the eastern and
western sides of the city, with tracts in the downtown and university areas
as exceptions.
To ground truth our measures, we examined the demographic and hous-
ing characteristics from the U.S. census and 2013 ACS data for these tracts,
facilitated focus groups with local researchers and practitioners, andcompared our measures against two alternative indicators of gentri ﬁcation
FIG.1 .—Gentrifying and nongentrifying Black ( >50% Black) and non-Black ( <50%
Black) census tracts in the city of Philadelphia, 2000 –2013. Authors ’deﬁnition based
on data from Census 2000, the 2009 –13 ACS, and U.S. Census TIGER/Line Shape ﬁles.Unequal Displacement
371

used in past research: coffee shops (Papachristos et al. 2011), using data
obtained from the Esri Business Locations Database from 2006 to 2012
(https://doc.arcgis.com/en/esri-d emographics/data/business.htm), and ﬁled build-
ing permits (Helms 2003), using data obtained from the Department of
Licenses and Inspections in Philadelphia from 2009 to 2013. Table 1, which
presents descriptive characteristics of tracts in each gentri ﬁcation category,
illustrates that our measure is consist ent with characteristics often asso-
ciated with gentri ﬁcation. Compared with nongentrifying tracts, gentrifying
tracts had greater increases in the shar es of White residents, college-educated
residents, median home values, and rent s. In addition, gentrifying tracts had
greater decreases in shares of Black residents and poverty rates and greater
increases in renters. While tracts that were gentrifying over the period be-gan with similar levels of median household incomes, poverty, and median
rents as those that did not gentrify, gentrifying tracts had higher shares of
college-educated residents and higher home values at the beginning of theperiod. Tracts that we identi ﬁed as gentrifying also had far greater numbers
of building permits per 100 housing units, greater numbers of coffee shops
per 100 residents, and greater increases in the number of coffee shops.
Comparisons between Black gentrifying (B-G) and Black nongentrifying
(B-NG) tracts and between non-Black gentrifying (NB-G) and non-Black
nongentrifying (NB-NG) tracts yield similar differences (see table 1). Blackand non-Black tracts, however, are notably different from each other and
reﬂect the reality of racial strati ﬁcation in Philadelphia. While B-G and
B-NG tracts had similar racial compositions at the beginning of the period,NB-NG tracts were much more racially mixed compared to NB-G tracts.
Most of the racial changes observed in the averages of gentrifying tracts oc-
cur among the B-G tracts, having average declines in the share of Black res-idents by 18.5% and average increases in share of White residents by 13.6%.
NB-G tracts also experienced declines in their Black shares but only by
4.7%. Black tracts began the period with lower median rents and housingvalues on average compared to non-Black tracts. Although B-G tracts had
greater average percentage increases in home values and rents compared
with NB-G tracts, home values and rents in B-G tracts were still substantiallylower on average by the end of the period, re ﬂecting a persistent racial hier-
archy among gentrifying tracts.
Neighborhood Quality Indicators
We assess four dimensions of the tracts to which residents move: (1) violent
crime rates, (2) disadvantage, (3) median household income, and (4) school
test scores. We obtained tract-level violent crime rates using geocoded data
from the Philadelphia Neighborhood Information System for 2002 –5 andAmerican Journal of Sociology
372

TABLE 1
Descriptive Statistics of Census Tracts by Gentri ﬁcation Category
GENTRIFYING NONGENTRIFYING
NON-
GENTRIFIABLE All BlackNon-
Black All BlackNon-
Black
Mean initial tract
characteristics, 2002:
Population. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,753 3,569 3,937 4,330 4,335 4,321 4,143
% of population non-
Hispanic White . . . . . . . . 35.2 12.0 58.4 17.4 7.1 35.2 62.6
% of population non-
Hispanic Black . . . . . . . . 48.2 80.9 15.5 64.6 87.6 24.9 27.1
% renters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57.1 60.7 53.5 45.9 47.1 43.9 35.4
% vacancies. . . . . . . . . . . . . 16.4 20.3 12.5 15.4 17.2 12.4 7.0% college educated . . . . . . . 19.0 15.8 22.3 8.6 8.0 9.7 28.8% below poverty. . . . . . . . . 34.5 36.0 33.0 35.3 34.0 37.5 11.9
Median home value
(2013 $) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99,567 87,499 111,635 61,438 57,628 68,006 157,321
Median rent (2013 $). . . . . . 609 537 681 564 543 600 823Crime rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9.8 11.1 8.5 10.5 10.7 10.1 3.0
Disadvantage index . . . . . . 2.9 3.8 2.0 4.3 4.3 4.5 2.3
Median household income
(2013 $) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30,460 28,711 32,209 29,745 29,783 29,680 60,066
Public school test scores . . . 55.3 36.3 70.3 37.0 32.0 47.3 75.4
Number of subsidized
housing units (2016) . . . . 179.2 264.1 94.3 160.0 213.7 67.4 28.6
Distance to city hall
(miles) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.0 2.1 2.0 4.2 3.8 4.8 6.9
Distance to universities
(miles) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.7 1.3 2.0 2.5 2.2 3.1 5.5
Mean change in tract
characteristics, 2002 –13:
Population. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72.4 230.9 175.7 268.12218.9 192.0 122.0
% non-Hispanic White . . . . 6.3 13.6 21.024.5 2.5211.4 27.1
% non-Hispanic Black . . . . 211.6218.524.7 2.322.3 3.1 1.5
% renters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.9 2.6 3.2 8.4 8.0 9.0 2.6
% vacancies. . . . . . . . . . . . . .9 21.2 2.9 2.1 2.5 1.3 1.8
% college educated . . . . . . . 13.9 14.4 13.4 1.2 1.2 1.3 5.3% below poverty. . . . . . . . . 23.62.426.8 4.1 3.6 4.8 3.2
Median home value
(% change). . . . . . . . . . . . 105.5 110.0 101.0 45.8 49.7 39.2 45.9
Median rent (% change) . . . 28.2 31.5 24.9 4.3 3.1 6.4 10.1Crime rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22.923.522.3 1.1 1.1 1.0 .4
Disadvantage index . . . . . . 21.621.721.6 2.12.3 .3 .0
Median household income
(% change). . . . . . . . . . . . 23.1 5.5 40.6 216.2216.4216.0
26.9
Public school test scores . . . 20.7 20.1 21.2 16.5 15.4 18.6 16.3
Number of tracts . . . . . . . . . . 56 28 28 128 81 47 181
NOTE.—Authors ’calculations using linearly interpolated data from Census 2000, 2009 –
13 ACS, the Philadelphia Police Department, the Pennsylvania Department of Education,
and the National Housing Preservation Database.

the Philadelphia Police Department for 2006 –14.16These rates include non-
negligent homicide, aggravated assault, and rape and are per 1,000 residents
in linearly interpolated tract populations from Census 2000 and the 2009 –
13 ACS estimates.
For disadvantage and median household income, we use Census 2000 data
and the 2009 –13 ACS ﬁve-year estimates, linearly interpolated for 2002 –14.
We follow Wodtke, Harding, and Elwert (2011) and employ principal com-
ponent analysis —a statistical method that converts a set of variables that
may be correlated into a set of linearly uncorrelated variables —to construct
a composite measure of disadvantage. The disadvantage index is derived
from the ﬁrst principal component of the following indicators: percentage
unemployed, percentage of residents living below the poverty level, percent-age of families headed by a female, percentage of families on public assis-
tance, percentage of residents older than 25 years with less than a high school
degree, percentage of residents older than 25 years with at least a college de-gree, and percentage of employed residents in professional or managerial oc-
cupations. In 2000, the resulting index ranged from 21.87 to 9.37, with higher
values indicating more disadvantage. All variables included are correlatedwith the disadvantage index in their expected directions.
We obtained elementary school test scores on the Pennsylvania System of
School Assessment, an annual standardized exam that measures studentachievement in reading, mathematics, science, and writing, from the Penn-
sylvania Department of Education.
17For each elementary school in Phila-
delphia, we calculated the sum of the proportion of students in the highestgrade level in the school (grades 4 or 5) scoring pro ﬁcient or advanced —the
standard required by federal guidelines for student progress. Using elemen-
tary school catchment area boundary maps from 2003 and 2009 –14, we
matched everyone ’s census block in the sample to the appropriate school
catchment area and test scores using the 2003 boundaries for 2003 –8 data
and the boundaries for their corresponding years for the 2009 –14 data.
Table 1 shows that gentrifying tracts on average begin the period with
slightly lower levels of crime and disadvantage and higher income and test
scores than nongentrifying tracts, and they had greater improvements on allmeasures. Further, B-G tracts have higher levels of crime and disadvantage
and lower income and test scores compared with NB-G tracts in 2000. The
16The data from the Philadelphia Neighborhood Information System come from the
Cartographic Modeling Lab at the University of Pennsylvania but are no longer avail-able online. We have made the data used in this study available in our data repository.
The data for 2002 –5 only include aggravated assault. To calculate violent crime rates
for these years, we used linear predictions based on the relationship between aggravated
assault and violent crime, using the 2006 –14 data.
17The data source no longer provides data prior to 2015. We have made the data used in
this study available in our data repository.American Journal of Sociology
374

improvements in these measures between B-G and NB-G tracts are similar,
except B-G tracts had much smaller increases in income.18
METHODS
Our analysis of residential mobility patterns in the context of gentri ﬁcation
and whether this varies by tract racial composition consists of three steps.
Weﬁrst examine the relationship between gentri ﬁcation and out-migration
rates among low-Score residents in our data to test whether mobility rates inour data are consistent with prior ﬁndings and whether they differ by tract
racial composition. Then, we assess where low-Score residents move from
gentrifying tracts relative to those in nongentrifying tracts, and we considertwo different types of outcomes: (1) the destination type (outside the city,
nongentri ﬁable, gentrifying, or nongentrifying tracts) and (2) the destina-
tion quality, measured by four separate indicators —crime rates, a disad-
vantage index, income, and school test scores. For all these analyses, we test
whether there are differences in residential mobility patterns from predom-
inantly Black tracts compared to non-Black tracts.
It is important to note our expectations given the counterfactual for these
analyses. If gentri ﬁcation does indeed have negative consequences for indi-
viduals ’residential destinations, we expect that the types and quality of the
residential destinations will not differ among low-Score residents between
movers from gentrifying and nongentrifying tracts. In other words, we ex-
pect that ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents from gentrifying tracts tend
to move downward into nongentrifying tracts, whereas residents from non-
gentrifying tracts churn among nongentrifying tracts. Finally, we examine
where residents are moving over time, to assess whether low-Score moversare increasingly moving to nongentrifying tracts, re ﬂecting indirect displace-
ment as tracts gentrify throughout Philadelphia. Table 2 summarizes each
analysis described below.
Out-Migration
We estimate a linear probability model predicting whether a resident lives
in a tract different from his or her origin tract one year before based on whether
one lives in a gentrifying tract and one ’s Score category. For the purposes of
this study, we do not count moves within tracts because such a move would
not re ﬂect any change between the characteristics of the origin and destina-
tion tracts. While a resident may also move multiple times in a short period,we only count one ’s origin and destination over a one-year span in case of
lagged address reporting. We use a linear model instead of a logistic or probit
18Unrestricted data and relevant code are availa ble at https://purl.stanford.edu/sn305sy2961.Unequal Displacement
375

TABLE 2
Summary of Analyses
Analysis Outcome Model Sample Quantity of Interest Result
Out-migration Moved from origin tract Linear probability Residents in gentri ﬁable tracts Probability of out-migration
for low-Score residents
in gentrifying vs.
nongentrifying tractsFigure 2,
table A2
Residential
destination
typeDestination type (outside of city
[reference], nongentri ﬁable,
gentrifying, nongentrifying)First stage: probit;
second stage:
multinomial logistic
regressionFirst stage: residents in gentri ﬁable
tracts; second stage: movers
from gentri ﬁable tractsProbability of moving to
tract types for low-Score
residents from gentrifying
vs. nongentrifying tractsFigure 3,
table A3
Residential
destination
qualityDestination percentile: crime,
disadvantage index, median
household income, school test
scoresFirst stage: probit;
second stage:
ordinary least squares
regressionFirst stage: residents in
gentri ﬁable tracts; second
stage: within-city movers
from gentri ﬁable tractsPredicted tract quality for
low-Score residents
from gentrifying vs.
nongentrifying tractsFigure 4,
table A4
Residential
destinations
across the
cityDestination type (nongentri ﬁable,
gentrifying, nongentrifying
[reference])Multinomial logistic
regression by cohort
periods (boom, bust,
recovery)Residents moving to or within
PhiladelphiaProbability of moving to
nongentrifying tracts
over time for low-Score
residentsFigure 5

model primarily because our models rely on interaction terms, for which the
interpretation of coef ﬁcients is problematic in logistic and probit models (Ai
and Norton 2003; Mood 2010). Results are similar using these alternatives,and table A1 presents results from a logistic regression model.
Our main independent variables are a set of dummy indicators for an in-
dividual ’s Score (no Score or Score below 580, 580 –649, and 650 –749, with
above 750 as the reference category), a dichotomous variable for whether or
not one ’s origin tract is gentrifying, and a vector of interaction terms be-
tween the gentri ﬁcation variable and each Score category. The interaction
terms allow us to test whether low-Score residents in gentrifying tracts ex-
perience mobility patterns different from those in nongentrifying tracts. We
also run these models and the next set of models replacing the gentri ﬁcation
dichotomous indicator and interaction terms with indicators of the racial
composition and gentri ﬁcation category of the tract (B-G, NB-G, B-NG,
and NB-NG [reference category]), to test whether residential mobility pat-terns of low-Score residents vary by the origin tract racial composition.
We control for observed individual and household characteristics that
may also in ﬂuence residential sorting patterns. Studies on residential mobil-
ity show that SES, life-cycle factors (e.g., age, marital status, family status),
tenure status, and unanticipated changes such as job loss or eviction in ﬂu-
ence moving decisions (Kendig 1984; Kan 1999; Crowder et al. 2012). Al-though the CCP has limited demographic information, we control for age
as a proxy for one ’s stage in the life cycle, the number of household members
with credit records and SSNs as a proxy for overcrowding, whether an in-dividual or any household member has at least one mortgage as a proxy
for homeowners, and whether the individual or a household member has at
least one seriously delinquent (90 1days) account, which may re ﬂect an un-
anticipated change that imposes a ﬁnancial burden.
19We also include ﬁxed
effects for each cohort to control for time trends.
We include tract-level controls based on the origin tract that may in ﬂu-
ence one ’s probability of moving: proximity measures for the distance to
city hall, a proxy for downtown; the nearest distance to major university
areas (Temple University or University City), a proxy for other major em-ployers in the city; the share of vacancies, obtained from U.S. census and
ACS data; subsidized housing units in each tract, determined from 2016
19ACS estimates indicate that about 40% of households in owner-occupied units in Phil-
adelphia do not have a mortgage, which is higher than the national average (35.7%). Be-
cause of this discrepancy, we do not analyze separately for potential renters. When we
examine residents with a mortgage vs. those without one, we ﬁnd similar but stronger
trends among residents without a mortgage. Note, too, that results are similar in modelsexcluding the delinquency variable. The data do not provide direct information on length
in residency. When we include a dummy variable for whether an individual lived in the
census tract for more than two years and exclude early cohorts, the main results are similar.Unequal Displacement
377

address-level data from the National Housing Preservation Database.20De-
scriptive statistics for these variables are in table 1 and show that gentrify-
ing tracts have more subsidized housing and are generally closer to down-town and universities relative to nongentrifying tracts. Notably, B-G tracts
had higher vacancy rates in 2000 and more subsidized housing compared
with all other tracts.
Residential Destination Type
Next, we examine movers ’destination type. Given that residential mobility
is a two-stage process, we follow prior approaches and estimate a two-stage
model in which we ﬁrst estimate whether one moves or stays in a census
tract and then assess the destinations of the movers in the second stage ofthe model (Massey, Gross, and Shibuya 1994; Crowder et al. 2012). Single-
stage models of only movers and without the correction produce substantively
similar results for all models. Our intention in using this selection model is toadjust for observable differences between movers and stayers before com-
paring the residential outcomes of movers. Because there are likely differ-
ences between movers and stayers that our data do not capture and, relat-edly, a relationship between moving or staying and where residents move,
we caution an interpretation of these estimates as the direct and unbiased
causal effect of gentri ﬁcation.
Theﬁrst-stage model predicts whether an individual lives in a census
tract different from his or her origin tract over a one-year period using a
probit model. We include the same set of variables as the model describedabove, except we exclude the interaction terms between the gentri ﬁcation
indicators and Scores. For the second stage, we predict the types of tracts
to which residents move over the one-year period using a multinomial logis-tic regression model, with moves outside of the city as the reference category.
The second stage only considers movers and includes a Heckman correc-
tion (the inverse Mills ratio) to adjust for bias in our estimates that occursbecause only movers are included. This model includes the individual- and
household-level control variables used above, proximity to downtown and
university areas of the origin tract, and cohort ﬁxed effects. In contrast to
theﬁrst stage of the model, the second stage excludes the tract-level shares
of vacancies and subsidized housing, which predict the likelihood of moving
but not where residents move and serve as the exclusion restrictions in ourtwo-stage model. The second-stage model also includes the gentri ﬁcation in-
dicators and interaction terms between the gentri ﬁcation variables and the
Score categories.
20These data provide a listing of all active federally subsidized housing properties for
nine separate funding streams, including Section 8 Project-Based Rental Assistance, Pub-
lic Housing, and Low-Income Housing Tax Cr edit. See https://preservationdatabase
.org/documentation/data-notes/ for details.American Journal of Sociology
378

Residential Destination Quality
To analyze destination characteristics, we restrict the analysis to within-city
movers because, despite trends of increasing poverty in the suburbs across
the United States (Kneebone and Berube 2013), the vast majority of suburbs
in Philadelphia are much more advantaged than its central city tracts on ourmeasures, and tract-level measures for crime and school test scores are not
available outside of the city. The ﬁrst-stage model predicts whether an indi-
vidual moved to a tract within the city over a one-year period using the probitmodel described above. The second-stage model uses the same exclusion re-
strictions as above and estimates an ordinary least squares regression model
predicting the percentile of movers ’destination tracts for each indicator
(crime, disadvantage, income, and test scores) in separate models. In addi-
tion to the variables included in the analysis above and the Heckman cor-
rection, we include a lagged variable of the percentile rank of movers ’origin
tract quality indicator.
21
Residential Destinations across the City
Last, we estimate a multinomial logistic regression model predicting whether
residents moving into and around Philadelphia move into nongentri ﬁable,
gentrifying, or nongentrifying (reference category) tracts. We include vari-
ables for Score categories, and control variables include the type of tract from
which the resident is moving (outside the city, gentrifying, nongentrifying, ornongentri ﬁable tracts), cohort ﬁxed effects, and identical individual- and
household-level control variables as above. We separately consider cohorts
who moved during the housing boom (2002 –7), the housing bust (2008 –11),
and the recovery (2012 –14) and test whether the likelihood of moving into
nongentrifying tracts changes over time for low-Score residents. We present
results from three separate models for these periods for interpretation, butmodels including all cohorts and interac tion terms between cohorts and Scores
yield similar results.
RESULTS
Out-Migration
Table 3 presents descriptive statistics of the individual residents in our
pooled sample who lived in the city of Philadelphia at any point from 2002
to 2013. The table also separates the sample by residents ’origin tract types.
About 10% of the sample moves each year, and gentrifying tracts had out-migration rates 3.0 percentage points higher than nongentrifying tracts.
21Following Allison (1990), we use a lagged regression model rather than a change model
because it is likely that one ’s initial origin tract characteristics, whether the tract gentri-
ﬁes, and one ’s destination characteristics are correlated.Unequal Displacement
379

As expected, nongentrifying tracts had more residents with missing or low
Scores, while nongentri ﬁable tracts had more residents with high Scores and
mortgages. Relative to nongentrifying and nongentri ﬁable tracts, gentrifying
tracts had more residents ages 25 –34 years and a greater share of households
with one adult.
When we compare tracts by racial composition, non-Black tracts had
higher out-migration rates compared to Black tracts among both gentrify-
ing and nongentrifying tracts. B-G tracts had more residents with low andTABLE 3
Descriptive Statistics of Sample of Philadelphia Residents from 2002 to2013
VARIABLEALL
RESIDENTSGENTRIFYING NONGENTRIFYING
NON-
GENTRIFIABLE All BlackNon-
Black All BlackNon-
Black
Person-years 517,429 68,069 31,663 36,406 169,617 111,415 58,202 279,743
% of sample. . 100.0 13.2 6.1 7.0 32.8 21.5 11.2 54.1
Moved . . . . . . . . 9.4 11.0 10.3 11.6 8.3 7.8 9.1 9.8
Equifax Risk
Score:
No Score . . . . . 10.4 12.7 15.2 10.4 15.2 15.6 14.3 6.9280–579 . . . . . 25.6 25.8 32.7 19.8 36.7 38.2 33.9 18.9
580–649 . . . . . 17.3 17.4 18.7 16.2 20.6 20.6 20.5 15.3
650–749 . . . . . 22.1 22.7 19.0 25.9 17.1 16.2 18.9 25.1
7501. . . . . . . 24.6 21.6 14.5 27.7 10.4 9.4 12.4 33.9
Mean Score . . 656.2 650.9 624.7 672.5 609.5 604.2 619.6 683.2
SD Score . . . . 112.3 109.8 108.1 106.5 102.4 101.1 103.9 109.4
Age:
25–34. . . . . . . 22.7 26.7 26.1 27.2 22.1 20.2 25.8 22.1
35–44. . . . . . . 20.1 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.8 19.6 23.2 19.5
45–54. . . . . . . 20.0 18.3 19.1 17.7 20.8 21.2 20.0 19.9
55–64. . . . . . . 15.8 14.1 13.7 14.5 15.4 16.4 13.6 16.4
≥65. . . . . . . . . 21.5 20.2 20.5 20.0 20.9 22.7 17.4 22.1
Adult household
size (includes
only thosewith credit):
1. . . . . . . . . . . 19.5 24.9 24.4 25.2 20.1 20.5 19.4 17.8
2. . . . . . . . . . . 28.8 28.2 27.8 28.6 25.7 25.5 26.0 30.7
31. . . . . . . . . 51.8 46.9 47.8 46.1 54.3 54.0 54.6 51.5
11mortgages in
household . . 32.1 23.0 19.2 26.4 19.2 17.1 23.1 42.2
11delinquent
(901days)
accounts inhousehold . . 20.1 19.3 22.9 16.1 26.2 27.8 23.3 16.5
N
OTE.—Authors ’calculations using data from the CCP. Results are for the full set of pooled
person-years and, therefore, can include the same individual more than once. With the excep-
tion of person-years, mean score, and SD, all values are percentages.American Journal of Sociology
380

missing Scores and delinquent accounts and fewer residents with mortgages
relative to NB-G tracts. Further, the Score distribution is substantially
higher in NB-G tracts compared to other gentri ﬁable tracts, which suggests
that the gentri ﬁcation in these tracts is farther along than in B-G tracts.
Table 4 presents mobility patterns for the low-Score residents in the sam-
ple who lived in a gentri ﬁable tract at any point from 2002 to 2013. The sec-
ond and third columns of the table display the share of residents in the
pooled sample who are stayers and movers by their origin tract type. The
remaining columns, which we discuss later, are a residential change matrixindicating the type of tract to which residents move, with the percentages
only including residents who moved. Like the trends presented in table 3,
low-Score residents have higher out-migration rates from gentrifying tracts(8.2%) than from nongentrifying tracts (7.7%), but this difference is much
smaller compared to the 3.0 percentage point difference for all residents.
This indicates that higher-Score residents comprise a greater share of theout-migration in gentrifying tracts. While the out-migration rate was higher
in non-Black tracts compared to Black tracts for all residents, these rates
were similar among low-Score residents.
Once we control for individual, household, and tract characteristics in
linear probability models predicting out-migration, we ﬁnd that low-Score
residents in gentrifying tracts are less likely to move than low-Score resi-dents in nongentrifying tracts. The ﬁrst bar in ﬁgure 2 displays the differ-
ence in the predicted probability of moving from a gentrifying compared
with a nongentrifying tract for the average low-Score resident.
22Table A2
displays the regression results for the main variables and a summary of co-
efﬁcients and results from F-tests comparing movers from different tracts by
gentri ﬁcation category. The difference in the probabilities is .008, which is
over a 10% difference. (The mobility rate among low-Score movers in the
sample is 7.8%.) Additional individual- and household-variables positively
associated with out-migration include single households and households with-out mortgages.
When we examine out-migration rates by the racial composition of tracts,
weﬁnd that the difference between low-Score residents in gentrifying and
nongentrifying tracts is driven by relatively high out-migration rates in
B-NG tracts, which the last three bars in ﬁgure 2 illustrate. There is no dif-
ference between NB-G and NB-NG tracts, but low-Score residents in B-Gtracts are signi ﬁcantly less likely to move than similar residents in B-NG
tracts, which suggests that residential instability among disadvantaged res-
idents is particularly high in B-NG tracts. There is no signi ﬁcant difference
22The average low-Score mover is 33 –44 years old in the 2007 cohort, with an adult
household size of two, no mortgage or delinquent accounts, and average levels of all other
controls.Unequal Displacement
381

TABLE 4
Neighborhood Change Matrix for Low-Score Residents in Analytic Sample
ORIGIN TRACT TOTALSTAYERS
(%)MOVERS
(%)DESTINATION TRACT (MOVERS ONLY)ANDODDS OF MOVING TO EACH DESTINATION TYPE
(VS.NONGENTRIFYING TRACTS )
Out of City Nongentri ﬁable Gentrifying All TypesNongentrifying
(%) % Odds % Odds % Odds % Odds
Gentrifying:
All tracts . . . . . . 26,165 91.8 8.2 30.3 .92 20.0 .60 16.7 .50 67.0 2.03 33.0Black . . . . . . . . . 15,166 91.8 8.2 26.8 .64 16.3 .39 14.7 .35 57.8 1.37 42.2
Non-Black. . . . . 10,999 91.8 8.2 35.2 1.71 25.0 1.22 19.3 .94 79.5 3.88 20.5
Nongentrifying:
All tracts . . . . . . 88,025 92.3 7.7 26.5 .62 21.9 .51 8.5 .20 56.9 1.32 43.1Black . . . . . . . . . 59,970 92.3 7.7 26.7 .61 20.1 .46 9.4 .22 56.2 1.28 43.9
Non-Black. . . . . 28,055 92.3 7.7 26.2 .63 26.0 .63 6.4 .15 58.5 1.41 41.5
N
OTE.—Authors ’calculations using data from Census 2000, 2009 –13 ACS, and the CCP. Percentages are row percentages. Percentages for destination
tracts are out of the total number of movers in each Score category. Results are for the full set of pooled person-years and, therefore, can include the s ame
individual more than once.

in the probability of moving from B-G and NB-G tracts for low-Score res-
idents, shown by the fourth bar in the ﬁgure.
Overall, the results contrast popular narratives of gentri ﬁcation and dis-
placement but support our ﬁrst hypothesis that low-Score residents in gen-
trifying tracts are not more likely to move compared with low-Score residents
in nongentrifying tracts. The ﬁndings are generally consistent with recent
quantitative studies on displacement focusing on whether people move
andﬁndings demonstrating the high levels of residential instability that dis-
advantaged residents in disadvantaged, speci ﬁcally Black, neighborhoods
face.
Residential Destination Type
Now, we turn to where low-Score residents move if they move. The latter
set of columns of table 4 show that the largest proportions of low-Score
movers from all gentrifying tracts moved to nongentrifying tracts (33.0%)
or outside of the city (30.3%). But, if we compare movers by the racial com-position of their origin tracts, over 40% of low-Score movers from B-G tracts
move to low-income, nongentrifying tracts, re ﬂecting downward moves. By
contrast, low-Score movers from NB-G tracts make far more upward moves:
FIG.2 .—Differences in predicted probabilities of moving for the average low-Score
resident in gentri ﬁable tracts ( N5237,686). Based on results from linear probability
models predicting moves for all residents living in gentri ﬁable tracts in the city of Phila-
delphia from 2002 to 2013 (excluding 2004). Estimation is based on data from the CCP,Census 2000, and 2009 –13 ACS. Regression results for main variables are displayed in
table A2.
1P<.10, * P<.05, ** P<.01, *** P<.001 (two-tailed tests).Unequal Displacement
383

only 20.5% of movers move to nongentrifying tracts, while 19.3% move to
other gentrifying tracts, 25.0% to nongentri ﬁable tracts, and 35.2% to outside
of Philadelphia —areas with signi ﬁcantly higher SES levels than Philadelphia
tracts. The odds ratios of moving to each destination type relative to nongen-
trifying tracts re ﬂect the relative differences in locational attainment for those
moving from gentrifying relative to nongentrifying tracts. In other words, thelocational gains by moving laterally to another gentrifying neighborhood
or moving upward to a nongentri ﬁable tract or out of the city are 2.6 times
ðð3:88=1:41Þ=ð1:37=1:28Þ52:58Þgreater for low-Score movers from NB-G
tracts compared to B-G tracts. While the odds ratio for residents from Black
tracts ð1:37=1:2851:07Þindicates that gentri ﬁcation provides some gains
for these residents, this is small and substantially lower than for non-Blacktracts.
The results are similar after we account for individual, household, and
tract characteristics and selective differences between movers and stayerswith two-stage models. Table A3 presents coef ﬁcients and standard errors
from the models for the main variables and results from F-tests compar-
ing movers from different tract types. Low-Score movers from gentrifyingtracts are less likely to move to nongentrifying tracts compared with similar
movers from nongentrifying tracts, which counters our second hypothesis
that residents from gentrifying tracts are just as likely to move to non-gentrifying tracts compared with ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents mov-
ing from nongentrifying tracts and better supports the alternative hypoth-
esis that gentri ﬁcation increases the likelihood of cashing in on the increased
value of the neighborhood. However, distinguishing tracts by racial compo-
sition reveals signi ﬁcant differences among gentrifying tracts. Figure 3 pres-
ents comparisons of the predicted probabilities of moving to each tract typefor average low-Score movers by their origin tract ’s gentri ﬁcation status
and racial composition. Each panel represents the destination type. The ﬁrst
set of bars in each panel compares NB-G and NB-NG tracts, and the secondset of bars compares B-G and B-NG tracts to examine differences within
tract compositions. The third set of bars compares NB-G and B-G tracts
to examine differential trajectories of residents by tract racial compositionin gentrifying tracts.
Overall, low-Score residents moving from NB-G tracts exhibit distinct
residential trajectories compared to other low-Score movers. They have asigniﬁcantly lower probability than movers from B-G and nongentrifying
tracts—Black or non-Black —of moving to nongentrifying tracts and a sig-
niﬁ
cantly higher probability than all other low-Score movers of moving out
of the city. Given that 35% of the city ’s census tracts are nongentrifying, low-
Score residents moving from B-G and nongentrifying tracts are dispropor-
tionately more likely to move to nongentrifying tracts. Compared to moversfrom B-G tracts, low-Score movers from NB-G tracts also have a higherAmerican Journal of Sociology
384

FIG.3 .—Predicted probabilities of moving to each tract type for the average low-Score resident in gentri ﬁable tracts. First-stage N5237,686;
second-stage N521,504. Based on results from two-stage models in which the ﬁrst stage predicts moves for all residents living in gentri ﬁable tracts
in the city of Philadelphia from 2002 to 2013 (excluding 2004) using a probit model and the second stage predicts the destination type of movers using
a multinomial logistic regression model with correction for moving. Estimation is based on data from the CCP, Census 2000, and 2009 –13 ACS.
Regression results for main variables are displayed in table A3.1P<.10, * P<.05, ** P<.01, *** P<.001 (two-tailed tests).

predicted probability of moving to high-income nongentri ﬁable tracts.23The
predicted probabilities of moving to other gentrifying tracts, however, are
not substantially different across tract origins. When we compare odds ratios
of moving to gentrifying or nongentri ﬁable tracts or moving out of the city
relative to moving to a nongentrifying tract based on the predicted probabil-
ities, those moving from B-G tracts have an odds ratio of .58, indicating that
gentri ﬁcation results in more losses rather than gains for these residents. The
locational gains for movers from NB-G tracts, who have an odds ratio of
1.70, are nearly three times larger (1 :70=:5852:93) compared with those
from B-G tracts.
Altogether, the results are consistent with our third hypothesis that resi-
dential destinations are disproportionately worse for disadvantaged resi-
dents moving from B-G tracts compared to those moving from NB-G tracts.Whereas those from NB-G tracts disproportionately make upward moves,
moving to the suburbs and nongentri ﬁable tracts, those from B-G tracts are
disproportionately making downward moves compared with those fromNB-G tracts, and other low-Score residents are disproportionately moving
to nongentrifying tracts.
Residential Destination Quality
Next, we examine the percentile rank of movers ’destinations for tract qual-
ity indicators among Philadelphia movers. We ﬁrst present the average
characteristics of the tracts to which low-Score residents move in table 5.
The table presents the average percentiles of the tract quality indicatorsTABLE 5
Average Tract Quality Percentile of Destination
for Low-Score City Movers in Sample
Origin Tract Type NViolent Crime
RateDisadvantage
IndexMedian
IncomeSchool Test
Score
All gentri ﬁable tracts ...6,272 61.2 65.3 35.9 38.1
Gentrifying:
All tracts . . . . . . . . . . 1,466 58.0 59.0 40.4 40.5Black . . . . . . . . . . . . . 898 62.8 63.3 36.1 35.3
Non-Black. . . . . . . . . 568 50.5 52.1 47.2 48.6
Nongentrifying:
All tracts . . . . . . . . . . 4,806 62.1 67.2 34.5 37.4Black . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,309 63.0 65.9 34.8 35.6
Non-Black. . . . . . . . . 1,497 60.3 70.0 33.9 41.3
N
OTE.—Values are based on data from the CCP, Census 2000, 2009 –13 ACS, the Philadel-
phia Police Department, and the Pennsylvania Department of Education.
23This difference is not statistically signi ﬁcant in analyses examining only movers in tracts
that begin the period in the bottom quartile of median household incomes in the city.American Journal of Sociology
386

of destinations of low-Score movers who move within the city of Philadel-
phia.24The values are from linear interpolations of the percentiles based
on the year of the move. The table illustrates the stark differences in the typesof tracts to which residents from NB-G tracts move relative to movers from
B-G tracts and movers from nongentrifying tracts. In particular, low-Score
movers from NB-G tracts move to tracts with signi ﬁcantly lower crime and
disadvantage and higher income and test scores compared with all other
movers, while movers from B-G tracts end up in similar destinations to those
from both B-NG and NB-NG tracts. The direction of changes in percentilesfrom origin to destination (not shown) re ﬂects substantial improvements for
movers from nongentrifying tracts, highlighting the circumstantial differ-
ences on average for movers from nongentrifying tracts. Further, changes formovers from gentrifying tracts are varied because B-G tracts begin the period
with lower percentiles on all indicators and appear to gentrify slowly —in
terms of socioeconomic gains (see table 1), while NB-G tracts begin more ad-vantaged and change rapidly, consistent with prior research (Hwang and
Sampson 2014). Thus, what appear to be upward and downward moves
based on tract characteristic percentiles are con ﬂated with changes in the or-
igin tract itself.
Next, we account for individual, household, and tract characteristics and
one ’s origin tract percentile using two-stage regression models to adjust for
the selective differences into moving within Philadelphia and the distinct
circumstances in which residents move. Table A4 presents coef ﬁcients and
standard errors for the main variables from the models including gentri ﬁ-
cation by racial composition tract categories and testing differences by the
gentri ﬁcation status and racial composition of the origin tract. Figure 4 illus-
trates the ﬁndings from these models comparing the predicted percentiles of
the tract quality indicators of movers by their origin tracts.
For brevity, we do not present results comparing movers from gentrify-
ing and nongentrifying tracts. Low-Score movers from gentrifying tractshave predicted probabilities of ending up in relatively higher quality tracts
in terms of income, schools, and crime compared with movers from non-
gentrifying tracts. Differences for disadvantage are not statistically signi ﬁ-
cant. Distinguishing tracts by their racial composition, however, reveals re-
sults consistent with ﬁndings on tract destination types. Low-Score movers
from NB-G tracts move to tracts with better quality on all indicators
24Income and disadvantage levels for all destinations outside of the city signi ﬁcantly ex-
ceed the distribution within the city. Nonetheless, we ﬁnd that low-Score movers from
NB-G tracts who move to the suburbs end up in tracts with percentile rankings 8.8 points
higher and 6.6 points lower than movers from B-G tracts for income and disadvantage,respectively. Compared to low-Score movers from B-G tracts, low-Score movers from
NB-NG tracts move to higher-SES tracts, and low-Score movers from B-NG tracts move
to slightly lower-SES tracts.Unequal Displacement
387

FIG.4 .—Predicted percentiles of destination characteristics for the average low-Score resident in gentri ﬁable tracts. First-stage N5237,686;
second-stage N513,426. Based on results from two-stage models in which the ﬁrst stage predicts moves for all residents living in gentri ﬁable tracts
in the city of Philadelphia from 2002 to 2013 (excluding 2004) using a probit model and the second stage predicts the destination characteristics of
movers using an ordinary least squares model with correction for moving within Philadelphia. Estimation is based on data from the CCP, Cen-sus 2000, 2009 –13 ACS, the Philadelphia Police Department, and the Pennsylvania Department of Education. Regression results for main variables
are displayed in table A4.
1P<.10, * P<.05, ** P<.01, *** P<.001 (two-tailed tests).

compared to low-Score residents moving from other tracts.25For example,
table A4 indicates that those from NB-G tracts have predicted percentiles of
destinations with crime and disadvantage that are 7.2 and 3.2 points, respec-tively, lower than those from NB-NG tracts and 7.1 and 4.1 points lower
than those from B-G tracts. They also end up in tracts with income and
school test score percentiles that are 7.7 and 6.7 points, respectively, higherthan in NB-NG tracts, and 5.8 and 9.6 points higher compared to B-G tracts.
Among Black tracts, however, those moving from B-G tracts have higher
predicted percentiles of disadvantage compared to low-Score movers fromB-NG tracts, but we do not ﬁnd signi ﬁcant differences for other indicators.
While low-Score movers from NB-G tracts move to signi ﬁcantly higher-
quality tracts compared to others, those from B-G tracts move to similar orworse destinations as the low-Score movers from nongentrifying tracts.
In sum, although we do not ﬁnd that gentri ﬁcation is associated with el-
evated rates of moving out of a tract, we ﬁnd substantial differences in mov-
ers’destinations that suggest unequal patterns of displacement by tract ra-
cial composition. While low-Score residents moving from NB-G tracts end
up in relatively high-quality tracts, low-Score residents from B-G tracts andnongentrifying tracts move among relatively low-quality tracts within Phil-
adelphia. The results suggest that low-Score movers in NB-G tracts are more
likely to move to opportunity, bene ﬁting from gentri ﬁcation, at least in loca-
tional attainment, by moving to tracts with more advantage compared to
other low-Score movers. Low-Score residents that move from B-G tracts do
not experience similar advantages, moving to relatively low-quality and non-gentrifying tracts. At the same time, low-Score residents in nongentrifying
tracts, both Black and non-Black, churn among similar low-quality and non-
gentrifying tracts, consistent with past ﬁndings that depict residential churn-
ing of the poor among poor neighborhoods (Sampson and Sharkey 2008).
Residential Destinations across the City
Last, we assess whether indirect displacement is occurring, by examining
where residents, strati ﬁed by Score, are moving more broadly when they
move into or around the city of Philadelphia from 2002 to 2014 as tracts gen-
trify and become less affordable to disadvantaged residents. We observe
43,952 moves in our data. Of these moves, 32% are by low-Score residents,and 62% of these moves by low-Score residents originate within the city.
Figure 5 presents predicted probabilities of moving to a nongentrifying,
gentrifying, or nongentri ﬁable census tract for the average low-Score (no
25The differences between NB-G vs. NB-NG are in the same direction but not statisti-
cally signi ﬁcant for disadvantage and test scores and are in the same direction but not
statistically different for B-G vs. NB-G for disadvantage, when we only consider tracts
that begin the period in the bottom quartile of median household incomes.Unequal Displacement
389

FIG.5 .—Predicted probabilities of moving to nongentrifying, gentrifying, and nongentri ﬁable tracts for the average low-Score and high-Score
movers over time. Boom N516,263; bust N516,058; recovery N511,631. Results from multinomial logistic regression models for each period
predicting residential destinations for all movers to the city of Philadelphia. The 2004 cohort is excluded in the models. Estimation is based on data
from the CCP, Census 2000, and 2009 –13 ACS. Statistical differences over time are discussed in text and do not compare low- and high-Score res-
idents. Full regression results are available on request.

Score or less than 580) resident during the housing boom (2002 –7), the hous-
ing bust (2008 –11), and the recovery (2012 –14) based on results from multi-
nomial logistic regression models for each period. We also include the pre-dicted probabilities for high-Score (750 or greater) residents for illustrative
purposes of comparison. Movers with Scores between these categories have
predicted probabilities between the probabilities illustrated. Regression re-sults are available on request.
Even though about one-third of the tracts are nongentrifying, low-Score
residents ’predicted probabilities of moving t o nongentrifying tracts increased
from .37 to over .44 across the period, while high-Score movers have pre-
dicted probabilities below .18 during the entire period. The differences over
time among low-Score movers are statistically signi ﬁcant at the P<:05 level.
Further, while half of the tracts are nongentri ﬁable, low-Score residents ’pre-
dicted probabilities of moving to nongentri ﬁable tracts decreased from .49 to
.43 over the period ( P<:05), while high-Score residents ’probabilities were
over .62 across the periods. High-Score residents are consistently more likely
to move into gentrifying tracts relative to low-Score residents, and the differ-
ence increased over time ( P<:05) as high-Score residents became increas-
ingly more likely and low-Score residents became increasingly less likely
to move into them —consistent with what we would expect in tracts under-
going gentri ﬁcation. Whereas high-Score residents ’probability of moving to
a gentrifying tract (.18) was 1.2 times the average low-Score residents ’proba-
bility (.14) during the housing boom, it was 1.5 times more during the housing
recovery (.20 vs. .13). A similar inverse pattern emerges in nongentrifyingtracts: whereas low-Score residents ’probability of moving to a nongentrifying
tract (.37) was 2.2 times the average high-Score residents ’probability (.16)
during the boom, it was 2.5 times larger during the recovery (.44 vs. .17).
Together, these two trends are indicative of indirect displacement, sup-
porting our ﬁnal hypothesis that indirect displacement is occurring. Low-
Score residents are increasingly more likely to move to low-income tractsthat do not experience socioeconomic upgrading and increasingly less likely
to move to gentrifying tracts. This pattern is consistent with recent ﬁndings
that show a signi ﬁcant decline in affordable housing options across Philadel-
phia, especially in gentrifying neighborhoods (Chizeck 2017), and suggests
that low-Score residents moving to or within Philadelphia are becoming in-
creasingly concentrated in disadvantaged neighborhoods within the city.
DISCUSSION
The spread of gentri ﬁcation in recent decades, particularly to predominantly
Black neighborhoods, de ﬁes the durable hierarchy that characterized central
city neighborhoods throughout the latter half of the 20th century. Our frame-work for studying the relationship between gentri ﬁcation and residentialUnequal Displacement
391

displacement expands our attention beyond whether disadvantaged residents
move out of gentrifying neighborhoods to where they move and to where they
cannot move in a racially strati ﬁed housing market. While gentri ﬁcation
counters past trends of White ﬂight from central city neighborhoods and
decreasingly re ﬂects Whites ’avoidance of minority neighborhoods, our study
reﬁnes theory and research on residential strati ﬁcation by showing how racial
strati ﬁcation continues to play a fundamental role in how gentri ﬁcation un-
folds. We show that neighborhood racial composition confers a distinct set
of advantages and disadvantages to ﬁnancially disadvantaged residents in
gentrifying neighborhoods, resulting in racially strati ﬁed outcomes for loca-
tional attainment. In the era of White ﬂight, metropolitan areas had unlimited
space to which White residents could move and develop, but, in the era of gen-triﬁcation, this is not the case for all residents moving out of gentrifying neigh-
borhoods. Such moves are embedded in a racially strati ﬁed housing market
with increasingly limited options, as the spread of gentri ﬁcation decreases af-
fordable neighborhood options within the city and minority residents face bar-
riers to accessing options both within the city and beyond. Although sociolo-
gists studying residential mobility have long considered where poor residentsmove and racial differences in these outcomes, theory and research stemming
from this body of work do not fully explain how these processes play out under
dynamics of neighborhood and metropo litan change. And, while there have
been a growing number of studies on gentri ﬁcation ’s consequences on dis-
placement, the complexity of residenti al mobility, particularly among the ur-
b a np o o r ,a n dt h e ﬁnancial advantages and disadvantages that gentri ﬁcation
can offer demand this more nuanced approach for improving our under-
standing of gentri ﬁcation ’s consequences for residential displacement.
Drawing on a novel data set, our study demonstrates that the conse-
quences of gentri ﬁcation are structured by racial strati ﬁcation, exacerbating
neighborhood inequality by race and class in the contemporary American
city. Like prior quantitative studies on displacement and consistent withourﬁrst hypothesis, our study ﬁnds that low-Score residents in Philadelphia ’s
gentrifying tracts are no more likely than residents in nongentrifying tracts to
move out of their tracts. Low-Score residents in B-NG tracts, rather, have rel-atively high rates of out-migration, suggesting high levels of residential insta-
bility in poor, Black neighborhoods. Low-Score residents who move, how-
ever, have divergent trajectories depending on where they move from, andthese differences are only revealed when we consider heterogeneity across
neighborhood racial composition. When we examine the residential destina-
tions of those who move and account for observed selective differences intomoving, those from NB-G tracts have high probabilities of moving out of the
city to the suburbs or to high-income nongentri ﬁable tracts, landing in signif-
icantly higher-quality tracts compared with the destinations of other movers.
Yet, those from B-G tracts, which both begin with lower quality and improveAmerican Journal of Sociology
392

along these indicators slower than NB-G tracts, have disproportionately high
probabilities of moving to nongentrifying tracts within the city, ending up
in tracts with similar characteristics and even higher levels of disadvantagecompared to those moving from nongentrifying tracts and much lower qual-
ity than the destinations of movers from NB-G tracts. The ﬁndings suggest
thatﬁnancially disadvantaged residents from NB-G tracts move in more fa-
vorable circumstances or disproportionately bene ﬁt from gentri ﬁcation com-
pared with those moving from B-G tracts.
We also show that gentri ﬁcation is fundamentally restructuring patterns
of neighborhood sorting among disadvantaged residents that further exac-
erbate neighborhood inequality. We ﬁnd that gentri ﬁcation is indirectly dis-
placing low-Score residents in Philadelphia by shrinking residential optionsfor them within the city as disadvantaged residents moving either to Phila-
delphia or within the city are increasingly moving to nongentrifying tracts
over time compared to other tracts, supporting our last hypothesis. We alsoﬁnd that movers from B-G tracts and from both B-NG and NB-NG tracts
are disproportionately more likely to move to nongentrifying tracts com-
pared to those from NB-G tracts. Although a signi ﬁcant portion of residents
from all groups also move out of the city, signi ﬁcantly more residents from
NB-G tracts do so. And even for those who move out of the city, residents
moving from B-G tracts move to tracts that have lower household incomesand more disadvantage compared to low-Score residents moving from NB-G
tracts, despite having improvements from their origin neighborhoods. Taken
together, the results suggest growing neighborhood inequality within citiesand new implications for the suburbs. While we have framed these moves
as upward in this study, they may certainly lead to longer commutes, greater
expenses associated with transportation and dif ﬁculty accessing services and
resources (Murphy and Wallace 2010).
Ourﬁndings highlight the racialized nature of gentri ﬁcation and its con-
sequences and are thus consistent with the emphasis in many qualitative ac-counts and public discourse on gentri ﬁcation ’s negative effects on minori-
ties and minority neighborhoods (Brown-Saracino 2017). Although we do
not know for certain whether low-Score residents in B-G tracts are Blackor whether low-Score residents in NB-G tracts are not Black, we argue that
racialized mechanisms governing both neighborhood valuation and sorting
processes at the individual and neighborhood levels explain our results.
26
While the socioeconomic upgrading and rising home values in gentrifying
neighborhoods can bene ﬁt preexisting disadvantaged residents, our study
26There are very few moves in our data by individuals who we could infer have a high
probability of being non-Black in Black tracts to assess differential outcomes. Within B-G
and B-NG tracts, less than 1.5% of blocks were over 80% non-Hispanic White and over
80% of blocks were over 80% Black according to the 2000 U.S. census.Unequal Displacement
393

suggests that this bene ﬁt may be limited to residents in gentrifying neighbor-
hoods with fewer Black residents. Disadvantaged residents in NB-G tracts
may be able to cash in on the higher values placed on NB-G relative to B-Gtracts, or they may have greater access to credit and wealth and face fewer
limitations on the housing market that can facilitate their upward mobility.
Disadvantaged residents moving from B-G tracts, however, may receivelower cash offers by landlords or developers, move more often in forced circum-
stances, or face greater obstacles in the housing market that limit their ability
to make an upward move. Because the period of our study spans the foreclo-sure crisis, which disproportionately a ffected minority neighborhoods in highly
segregated cities like Philadelphia (Hw ang, Hankinson, and Brown 2015), low-
Score movers in B-G tracts may also d isproportionately face greater ﬁnancial
disadvantages related to loan terms or wealth building, prohibiting their abil-
ity to convert the increased value of their neighborhood into a path toward
upward mobility. Further comparative research on the experiences of disad-vantaged residents in gentrifying neighborhoods of different racial composi-
tions or by individuals ’race or ethnicity can illuminate these differences.
Our study also highlights how a novel large-scale data source —consumer
credit data —can shed light on residential strati ﬁcation and mobility. Credit
scores re ﬂect an important aspect of ﬁnancial (dis)advantage that other tra-
ditional measures, like income, do not capture. In a time when economic in-security has increased and wealth has declined for many (Carr and Mulcahy
2010), ﬁnancial stability provides a key indicator of how individuals fare in
the housing market. Unlike longitudinal data used in prior mobility analy-ses, credit score data allow us to track residential mobility, including loca-
tions of both origins and destinations of movers, at frequent intervals and in
a recent period for a large sample of the adult population.
Despite the temporal and spatial richness and scale of the data, such data
also have their limits. Credit record data face some of the limitations that
other data sets used for studying mobility also experience, such as the dis-proportionate exclusion of individuals vulnerable to displacement and the
lack of information on the circumstances of the moves. In addition, loca-
tional information is inaccurate for those who become homeless, includingthose who resort to temporary living situations. Therefore, we view our es-
timates of out-migration rates and the degree to which ﬁnancially disadvan-
taged residents are moving to speci ﬁc kinds of neighborhoods as an under-
estimate of growing neighborhood inequality and the constraints of the
changing housing market for disadvantaged residents. Without informa-
tion on the circumstances of the move, we are unable to distinguish betweenwhether movers from B-G neighborhoods are more likely to face forced
moves than movers from NB-G neighborhoods or whether the differences
reﬂect mechanisms of place strati ﬁcation. The data also highlight a more
general shortcoming of big data for sociological research. Although thereAmerican Journal of Sociology
394

are increasingly new sources that contain detailed data on large numbers of
people, the preservation of anonymity and privacy are crucial for the avail-
ability and use of these data. This necessi ty, however, inherently limits infor-
mation on individuals. In this study, the lack of information on individuals in
the data, such as race and ethnicity, home ownership status, and university
enrollment, limits the extent to which we can identify the various mechanismsaffecting residents.
Although our results suggest that gentri ﬁcation affects residential sorting
patterns among low-Score residents from 2002 to 2014 in Philadelphia indistinct ways by tract racial composition, as with all efforts with causal in-
ference, we are limited in our ability to make strong causal claims. While we
adjust for observable differences between movers and stayers and for ob-servable characteristics among movers, there are still factors that we do
not observe in our data but that likely affect residential sorting patterns,
such as having children, and the selection model does not fully remove allbias associated with moving rather than staying. Moreover, because gentri-
ﬁcation is an ongoing, evolving process that occurs unevenly across neigh-
borhoods over time, a direct assessment of the relationship between gentri-ﬁcation and displacement in a pre- and posttreatment causal framework is
inappropriate. The infrequency of the census and ACS data further pre-
cludes identi ﬁcation of when gentri ﬁcation begins in a place or its stage
when residents move. As new sources of data on neighborhood characteris-
tics at more frequent intervals —such as Google street-level imagery and
Craigslist rent prices —become available, future studies linked with these
data can address these issues. Moreover, a longer period of analysis may
be necessary to capture a full picture of residential displacement, especially
in a relatively loose housing market like Philadelphia.
While our study is based on the case of Philadelphia, we believe that our
ﬁndings on racialized differences in residential mobility patterns associated
with gentri ﬁcation would bear out in other cities with similar histories of
large-scale decline and high levels of racial segregation —cities that shape
much of the theory and research in urban sociology. In “superstar cities ”
(Gyourko et al. 2013, p. 167) with stronger housing markets and where thehousing supply is lacking, differences in out-migration rates may be signi ﬁ-
cant across gentrifying neighborhoods, and we may also see greater moves
outside of the city but to areas with more disadvantage or to declining areas.Recent studies have documented the decline of the inner-ring suburbs, as cit-
ies have become increasingly unaffordable (Kneebone and Berube 2013).
While there is evidence of this decline in some of Philadelphia ’s surrounding
suburbs, the suburbs of Philadelphia are still much more socioeconomically
advantaged on average than even the neighborhoods at the upper end of the
city ’s socioeconomic distribution. In cities with lower levels of racial segre-
gation, we may also expect distinct outcomes, as long-term integration mayUnequal Displacement
395

be more feasible, racialized processes in the housing market may be more
muted, and neighborhood differences may be less severe. Further research
on other cities with tighter housing markets and distinct contexts of segrega-tion is necessary to expand our understanding of gentri ﬁcation ’s effects. Our
ﬁndings, nonetheless, rely on the best available data at this time on where
residents move, to offer a crucial starting point for future efforts to betterunderstand how gentri ﬁcation affects residential mobility and strati ﬁcation.
CONCLUSION
Our study sheds new light on the consequences of gentri ﬁcation and con-
tributes to theories of neighborhood change, residential mobility, and racial
and ethnic strati ﬁcation by demonstrating how gentri ﬁcation is recon ﬁg-
uring the 21st-century American city in racialized ways. By considering
where residents move and their origin tracts ’racial composition, we show
how gentri ﬁcation unfolds in ways that are governed by racial strati ﬁcation,
affecting residents living within gentrif ying neighborhoods, as well as the con-
text in which residents are moving, to exacerbate neighborhood inequality.
Whether gentri ﬁcation will continue at its current pace and perpetuate
this process is uncertain, but the patterns we observe suggest the need for
policies to ensure that gentri ﬁcation does not continue to increase socioeco-
nomic and racial segregation. Given that our ﬁndings suggest that the ben-
eﬁts of gentri ﬁcation disproportionately accrue to ﬁnancially disadvantaged
residents in NB-G neighborhoods relative to B-G neighborhoods, targeted
efforts to both prevent existing disadvantaged residents from moving down-ward and to preserve an affordable housing supply in B-G neighborhoods
are necessary. While Philadelphia ’s recently implemented property tax re-
lief program, which prohibits increases in property taxes for long-time low-and middle-income homeowners, is an important step in mitigating out-
migration, policies and programs that ensure residential stability for renters
and access to quality neighborhoods for disadvantaged residents who moveare necessary to maintain diverse neighborhoods and help facilitate the long-
term well-being of these residents. Additional efforts that help address racial
discrimination in the housing market and racial wealth disparities are alsoneeded. Finally, sustained investment in resources and opportunities in non-
gentrifying neighborhoods are necessary to ensure that disadvantaged mov-
ers are not limited to neighborhoods with high levels of disadvantage, highcrime, and low-quality schools. Place-based investment that can attract ra-
cial and socioeconomic diversity while implementing policies that allow dis-
advantaged residents to stay, connect them to resources and opportunities,and include them in the development process is needed. Without the right
policy levers and the continued commodi ﬁcation of housing and neighbor-
hoods, neighborhood inequality will continue to persist as cities transform.American Journal of Sociology
396

APPENDIX
TABLE A1
Logistic Regression Results Predicting Out-Migration for
Philadelphia Residents in Gentri ﬁable Tracts
GENTRIFICATIONGENTRIFICATION
BYRACE
Coef. SE Coef. SE
Equifax Risk Score (ref.: 750 1):
No Score or <5 8 0 .............................. 2.31*** .04 2.47*** .05
580–6 4 9...................................... . 0 2 . 0 4 2.04 .05
650–749 ... .11** .04 .11* .05
Gentri ﬁcation dummy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.05 .05 ...
Gentri ﬁcation by race (ref.: non-Black nongentrifying):
Non-Black gentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 2.13* .06
Black nongentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 2.19** .07
Black gentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 2.15* .07
Gentri ﬁcation /C2Equifax Risk Score:
Gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0................... 2.01 .04 ...
Gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9.......................... . 1 11.05 ...
Gentrifying /C2650–749 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .24*** .05 ...
Non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0.......... ... .141.07
Non-Black gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9................. ... .17* .07
Non-Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9................. ... .23** .07
Black nongentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0........... ... .27*** .07
Black nongentrifying /C2580–6 4 9.................. ... .131.07
Black nongentrifying /C2650–7 4 9.................. ... .01 .07
Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0.............. ... .141.08
Black gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9..................... ... .161.08
Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9..................... ... .24** .08
Summary of coef ﬁcients and F-tests:
Gentrifying vs. nongentrifying: gentrifying 1
(gentrifying /C2no Score or <580). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.07** ...
Non-Black gentrifying vs. non-Black nongentrifying:
non-Black gentrifying 1(non-Black gentrifying /C2no
Score or <580) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .01
Black gentrifying vs. Black nongentrifying: (Black
gentrifying 1Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580)2
(Black nongentrifying 1Black nongentrifying /C2no
Score or <5 8 0 )............................... ... 2.10***
Black gentrifying vs. non-Black gentrifying: (Black
gentrifying 1Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580)2
(non-Black gentrifying 1non-Black gentrifying /C2no
Score or <5 8 0 )............................... ... 2.02
NOTE.—Logistic regression models include cohort ﬁxed effects and the following control var-
iables: age, household size, mortgage status, delinquency status, proximity to city hall, proximity
to university areas, vacancy rate, and subsidized housing units. Estimation is based on data from
the CCP, Census 2000, and 2009 –13 ACS. N5237,686. Two-tailed signi ﬁcance tests.
1P<.10.
*P<.05.
**P<.01.
***P<.001.Unequal Displacement
397

TABLE A2
Results Predicting Out-Migration for Philadelphia
Residents in Gentri ﬁable Tracts
GENTRIFICATIONGENTRIFICATION
BYRACE
Coef. SE Coef. SE
Equifax Risk Score (ref.: 750 1):
No Score or <5 8 0 .............................. 2.02*** .00 2.04*** .00
580–6 4 9...................................... . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 0
650–749 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .01*** .00 .02*** .00
Gentri ﬁcation dummy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.01 .00 ...
Gentri ﬁcation by race (ref.: non-Black nongentrifying):
Non-Black gentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 2.01 .00
Black nongentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 2.01* .01
Black gentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 2.01* .01
Gentri ﬁcation /C2Equifax Risk Score:
Gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0................... . 0 0 . 0 0 ...
Gentrifying /C2580–649 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .01** .00 ...
Gentrifying /C2650–749 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .03*** .00 ...
Non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0.......... ... .01 .01
Non-Black gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9................. ... .02* .01
Non-Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9................. ... .03*** .01
Black nongentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0........... ... .02*** .00
Black nongentrifying /C2580–6 4 9.................. ... .01 .01
Black nongentrifying /C2650–7 4 9.................. ... 2.01 .01
Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0.............. ... .01 .01
Black gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9..................... ... .011.01
Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9..................... ... .02*** .01
Summary of coef ﬁcients and F-tests:
Gentrifying vs. nongentrifying: gentrifying 1
(gentrifying /C2no Score or <580) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.01** ...
Non-Black gentrifying vs. non-Black nongentrifying:
non-Black gentrifying 1(non-Black gentrifying /C2
no Score or <580) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .00
Black gentrifying vs. Black nongentrifying: (Black
gentrifying 1Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580)2
(Black nongentrifying 1Black nongentrifying /C2no
Score or <5 8 0 )............................... ... 2.01***
Black gentrifying vs. non-Black gentrifying: (Black
gentrifying 1Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580)2
(non-Black gentrifying 1non-Black gentrifying /C2no
Score or <5 8 0 )............................... ... .00
NOTE.—Linear probability models include cohort ﬁxed effects and the following control
variables: age, household size, mortgage status, delinquency status, proximity to city hall,proximity to university areas, vacancy rate, and subsidized housing units. Estimation is based
on data from the CCP, Census 2000, and 2009 –13 ACS. N5237,686. Two-tailed signi ﬁcance
tests.
1P<.10.
*P<.05.
**P<.01.
***P<.001.
398

TABLE A3
Results Predicting Destination Type for Movers from Gentri ﬁable Tracts
GENTRIFICATION GENTRIFICATION BY RACE
Coef. SE Coef. SE
First stage predicting move:
Equifax Risk Score (ref.: 750 1):
No Score or <5 8 0 ................................. 2.18*** .01 2.18*** .01
580–6 4 9......................................... . 0 1 . 0 1 . 0 1 . 0 1
650–749 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10*** .01 .10*** .01
Control variables included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes YesYear ﬁxed effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes Yes
N
ON-
GENTRIFYING GENTRIFYINGNON-
GENTRIFIABLENON-
GENTRIFYING GENTRIFYINGNON-
GENTRIFIABLE
Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE
Second stage predicting destination (ref.: out of city):
Equifax Risk Score (ref.: 750 1):
No Score or <580 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .89*** .15 .45* .21 .81*** .15 1.13*** .19 .36 .25 .71*** .17
580–649 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.41*** .10 .62*** .14 .48*** .09 1.49*** .15 .371.21 .47*** .12
650–749 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.18*** .12 .62*** .17 .17 .11 1.20*** .17 .57** .22 .271.14
Gentri ﬁcation dummy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.75*** .15 .00 .15 .10 .11 ... ... ...
Gentri ﬁcation by race (ref.: non-Black nongentrifying):
Non-Black gentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 2.99*** .22 2.16 .20 .07 .13
Black nongentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... .16 .18 2.06 .24 2.20 .14
Black gentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 2.401.22 .14 .22 2.07 .16
Gentri ﬁcation /C2Equifax Risk Score:
Gentrifying /C2no Score or <580 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .607*** .16 .01 .17 2.08 .12 ... ... ...
Gentrifying /C2580–649 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3171.17 .06 .18 2.09 .13 ... ... ...
Gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9............................. . 0 3 . 1 7 . 0 3 . 1 7 2.05 .12 ... ... ...
Non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0............. ... ... ... .30 .24 .20 .24 2.08 .16
Non-Black gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9.................... ... ... ... .24 .25 .38 .25 .00 .17
Non-Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9.................... ... ... ... 2.12 .25 .00 .23 2.09 .15
399

TABLE A3 ( Continued )
GENTRIFICATION
Coef. SE C
Black nongentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0.............. ... ... ... 2.26
Black nongentrifying /C2580–6 4 9..................... ... ... ... 2.14
Black nongentrifying /C2650–7 4 9..................... ... ... ... 2.11
Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0 ................. ... ... ... .35
Black gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9........................ ... ... ... .10
Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9........................ ... ... ... .02
Control variables included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes Yes Yes
Year ﬁxed effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes Yes Yes
Summary of coef ﬁcients and F-tests:
Gentrifying vs. nongentrifying: gentrifying 1(gentrifying /C2
no
Score or <580) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.14* .00 .02
Non-Black gentrifying vs. non-Black nongentrifying: non-
Black
gentrifying 1(non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580) . ... ... ... 2
Black gentrifying vs. Black nongentrifying: (Black gentrifying
1
Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580)2(Black nongentrifying
1
Black nongentrifying /C2no Score or <580) . . . ............ ... ... ...
Black gentrifying vs. non-Black gentrifying: (Black gentrify-
ing1
Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580)2(non-Black gentrifying
1
non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ...TABLE A3 ( Continued )
NON-
GENTRIFYING GENTRIFYINGNON-
GENTRIFIABLENON-
GENTRIFYING GENTRIFYINGNON-
GENTRIFIABLE
Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE
Black nongentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0.............. ... ... ... 2.26 .19 .28 .26 .02 .16
Black nongentrifying /C2580–6 4 9..................... ... ... ... 2.14 .20 .39 .28 .06 .17
Black nongentrifying /C2650–7 4 9..................... ... ... ... 2.11 .20 .01 .28 2.04 .17
Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0................. ... ... ... .35 .24 .09 .25 2.10 .19
Black gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9........................ ... ... ... .10 .25 .15 .28 2.15 .20
Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9........................ ... ... ... .02 .25 .06 .26 2.07 .19
Control variables included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes YesYear ﬁxed effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Summary of coef ﬁcients and F-tests:
Gentrifying vs. nongentrifying: gentrifying 1(gentrifying /C2
no Score or <580) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.14* .00 .02 ... ... ...
Non-Black gentrifying vs. non-Black nongentrifying: non-Black
gentrifying 1(non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580). . . ... ... ... 2.70*** .04 2.01
Black gentrifying vs. Black nongentrifying: (Black
gentrifying 1Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580)2
(Black nongentrifying 1Black nongentrifying /C2no Score
or<
5 8 0 )........................................... ... ... ... .04 .01 .19
Black gentrifying vs. non-Black gentrifying: (Black
gentrifying 1Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580)2
(non-Black gentrifying 1non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score
or<580). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... .64*** .19 2.16**
NOTE.—Results are from two-stage regression models in which the ﬁrst stage predicts moves for all residents living in gentri ﬁable tracts in the city of
Philadelphia from 2002 to 2013 (excluding 2004) using a probit model and the s econd stage predicts the destination type of movers using a multinomial
logistic regression model with correction for moving. Est imation is based on data from the CCP, Census 2000, and 2009 –13 ACS. First-stage N5237,686;
second-stage N521,504. Two-tailed signi ﬁcance tests.
1P<.10.
*P<.05.
**P<.01.
***P<.001.
400

TABLE A4
Results Predicting Destination Quality for City Movers
from Gentri ﬁable Tracts
CRIME DISADVANTAGE INCOME SCHOOLS
Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE
First stage predicting city move:
Equifax Risk Score (ref.: 750 1):
No Score or <580 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .04* .02 .04* .02 .04* .02 .04* .02
580–649 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18*** .02 .18*** .02 .18*** .02 .18*** .02
650–749 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20*** .02 .20*** .02 .20*** .02 .20*** .02
Control variables included Yes Yes Yes YesYear ﬁxed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Second stage predicting destination quality:
Origin tract percentile. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17*** .01 .33*** .01 .16*** .01 .07*** .01
Equifax Risk Score (ref.: 750 1):
No Score or <580 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18.51*** 1.66 19.95*** 1.63 220.17*** 1.61 219.72*** 1.84
580–649 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16.44*** 2.67 22.33*** 2.62 224.58*** 2.60 223.23*** 2.97
650–749 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9.46*** 2.82 17.66*** 2.77 220.06*** 2.75 218.30*** 3.13
Gentri ﬁcation by race (ref.: non-Black nongentrifying):
Non-Black gentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21.46 1.97 24.48* 1.96 8.14*** 1.92 2.47 2.18
Black nongentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.61* 2.04 1.36 2.01 23.02 1.98 214.01*** 2.27
Black gentrifying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21.15 2.25 24.21
12.24 4.90* 2.22 25.89* 2.50
Gentri ﬁcation /C2Equifax Risk Score:
Non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0................................ 25.70** 2.16 1.30 2.14 2.44 2.11 7.11** 2.41
Non-Black gentrifying /C2580–6 4 9....................................... 24.48* 2.28 .87 2.25 2.75 2.22 6.18* 2.54
Non-Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9....................................... 23.05 2.19 21.77 2.16 .96 2.14 6.96** 2.44
401

TABLE A4 ( Continued )
CRIME DISADVANTAGE INCOME SCHOOLS
Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE
Black nongentrifying /C2no Score or <5 8 0................................. 24.27* 2.16 23.09 2.13 4.27* 2.10 10.31*** 2.40
Black nongentrifying /C2580–6 4 9........................................ 22.32 2.27 21.04 2.24 2.79 2.22 6.99** 2.53
Black nongentrifying /C2650–749 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.25 2.36 2.08 2.32 .95 2.30 5.17* 2.63
Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.07 2.41 5.14* 2.38 23.04 2.36 2.96 2.68
Black gentrifying /C2580–649 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.22 2.59 4.4412.5623.05 2.53 1.44 2.89
Black gentrifying /C2650–7 4 9........................................... 21.18 2.58 2.99 2.55 .64 2.52 2.20 2.88
Control variables included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes Yes Yes YesYear ﬁxed effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Yes Yes Yes Yes
Summary of coef ﬁcients and F-tests:
Non-Black gentrifying vs. non-Black nongentrifying: non-Black gentrifying 1(non-
Black gentrifying /C2no Score or <580). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27.16*** 23.18* 7.70*** 6.65***
Black gentrifying vs. Black nongentrifying: (Black gentrifying 1Black gentrifying /C2
no Score or <580)2(Black nongentrifying 1Black nongentrifying /C2no Score or
<580) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.43 2.66** .61 .77
Black gentrifying vs. non-Black gentrifying: (Black gentrifying 1Black gentrifying /C2
no Score or <580)2(non-Black gentrifying 1non-Black gentrifying /C2no Score or
<580) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.07*** 4.12** 25.84*** 29.57***
N
OTE.—Results are from two-stage regression models in which the ﬁrst stage predicts moves for all residents living in gentri ﬁable tracts in the city of Phil-
adelphia from 2002 to 2013 (excluding 2004) using a probit model and the second stage predicts the destination type of movers using a multinomial logis tic
regression model with correction for moving. Estimation is based on data from the CCP, Census 2000, 2009 –13 ACS, the Philadelphia Police Department, and
the Pennsylvania Department of Education. First-stage N5237,686; second-stage N513,426. Two-tailed signi ﬁcance tests.
1P<.10.
*P<.05.
**P<.01.
***P<.001.

REFERENCES
Ai, Chunrong, and Edward C. Norton. 2003. “Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit
Models. ”Economic Letters 80:123–29.
Allison, Paul. 1990. “Change Scores as Dependent Variables in Regression Analysis. ”So-
ciological Methodology 20 (1): 93 –114.
Anderson, Elijah. 1990. Race, Class, and Change in an Urban Community . Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Anderson, Raymond. 2007. The Credit Scoring Toolkit: Theory and Practice for Retail
Credit Risk Management and Decision Automation . New York: Oxford University
Press.
Atkinson, Rowland. 2004. “The Evidence on the Impact of Gentri ﬁcation: New Lessons
for the Urban Renaissance? ”European Journal of Housing Policy 4 (1): 107 –31.
Bader, Michael D. M., and Siri Warkentien. 2016. “The Fragmented Evolution of Racial
Integration since the Civil Rights Movement. ”Sociological Science 3:135–66.
Barton, Michael. 2016. “An Exploration of the Importance of the Strategy Used to Iden-
tify Gentri ﬁcation. ”Urban Studies 53 (1): 92 –111.
Betancur, John. 2011. “Gentri ﬁcation and Community Fabric in Chicago. ”Urban Stud-
ies48 (2): 383 –406.
Bostic, Raphael, Paul S. Calem, and Susan M. Wachter. 2005. “Hitting the Wall: Credit
as an Impediment to Homeownership. ”Pp. 155 –72 in Building Assets, Building Credit:
Creating Wealth in Low-Income Communities . Washington, D.C.: Brookings.
Brevoort, Kenneth P., Philipp Grimm, and Michelle Kambara. 2016. “Credit Invisibles
and the Unscored. ”Cityscape 18 (2): 9 –33.
Brown-Saracino, Japonica. 2017. “Explicating Divided Approaches to Gentri ﬁcation
and Growing Income Inequality. ”Annual Review of Sociology 43:515–39.
Calem, Paul S., Kevin Gillen, and Susan M. Wachter. 2004. “The Neighborhood Distri-
bution of Subprime Mortgage Lending. ”Journal of Real Estate Finance and Econom-
ics29 (4): 393 –410.
Capperis, Sean, Ingrid Gould Ellen, and Brian Karfunkel. 2015. “Renting in America ’s
Largest Cities: NYU Furman Center/Capital One National Affordable Rental Hous-
ing Landscape. ”New York University Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Pol-
icy, May 28. http://furmancenter.org/ ﬁles/CapOneNYUFurmanCenter__National
RentalLandscape_MAY2015.pdf.
Carlson, H. Jacob. 2020. “Measuring Displacement: Assessing Proxies for Involuntary
Residential Mobility. ”City and Community . https://doi.org/10.1111/cico.12482.
Carr, James H., and Michelle Mulcahy. 2010. “Twenty Years of Housing Policy: What ’s
New, What ’s Changed, What ’s Ahead? ”International History Review 20 (4): 551 –76.
Charles, Camille Z. 2003. “The Dynamics of Racial Residential Segregation. ”Annual
Review of Sociology 29:167–207.
Chizeck, Seth. 2017. “Gentri ﬁcation and Changes in the Stock of Low-Cost Rental Hous-
ing in Philadelphia, 2000 to 2014. ”Cascade Focus , January. http://www.philadelphia
fed.org/-/media/community-development /publications/cascade-focus/gentri ﬁcation
-and-changes-in-the-stock-of-low-cost-rental-housing/cascade-focus_5.pdf?la 5en.
Crowder, Kyle, Jeremy Pais, and Scott J. South. 2012. “Neighborhood Diversity, Metro-
politan Constraints, and Household Migration. ”American Sociological Review 77 (3):
325–53.
Crowder, Kyle, and Scott J. South. 2005. “Race, Class, and Changing Patterns of Migra-
tion between Poor and Nonpoor Neighborhoods. ”American Journal of Sociology 110
(6): 1715 –63.
Davidson, Mark. 2008. “Spoiled Mixture: Where Does State-Led ‘Positive ’Gentri ﬁca-
tion End? ”Urban Studies 45 (12): 2385 –405.
DeLuca, Stephanie, Philip M. E. Garboden, and Peter Rosenblatt. 2013. “Segregating
Shelter: How Housing Policies Shape the Residential Locations of Low-IncomeUnequal Displacement
403

Minority Families. ”Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science
647 (1): 268 –99.
Desmond, Matthew. 2016. Evicted: Poverty and Pro ﬁt in the American City . New York:
Broadway.
Desmond, Matthew, and Tracey Shollenberger. 2015. “Forced Displacement from Rental
Housing: Prevalence and Neighborhood Consequences. ”Demography 52 (5): 1751 –72.
Ding, Lei, Jackelyn Hwang, and Eileen Divringi. 2016. “Gentri ﬁcation and Residential
Mobility in Philadelphia. ”Regional Science and Urban Economics 61:38–51.
Du Bois, W. E. B. 1899. The Philadelphia Negro: A Social Study . Philadelphia: Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press.
Ellen, Ingrid Gould, and Katherine M. O ’Regan. 2011. “How Low-Income Neighbor-
hoods Change: Entry, Exit, and Enhancement. ”Regional Science and Urban Econom-
ics41 (2): 89 –97.
Fair Isaac Corporation. 2015. “Understanding Your FICO Score. ”http://www.my ﬁco
.com/Downloads/Files/myFICO_UYFS_Booklet.pdf.
Federal Reserve Board. 2007. “Report to the Congress on Credit Scoring and Its Effects
on the Availability and Affordability of Credit. ”Board of Governors of the Federal Re-
serve System, Washington, D.C. http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/rptcongress
/creditscore.
Fellowes, Matt. 2006. “Credit Scores, Reports, and Getting Ahead in America. ”Washing-
ton, D.C.: Brookings.
Freeman, Lance. 2005. “Displacement or Succession? Residential Mobility in Gentrify-
ing Neighborhoods. ”Urban Affairs Review 40 (4): 463 –91.
——— . 2006. There Goes the Hood: Gentri ﬁcation from the Ground Up . Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.
——— . 2009. “Neighbourhood Diversity, Metropolitan Segregation and Gentri ﬁcation:
What Are the Links in the US? ”Urban Studies 46 (10): 2079 –101.
Freeman, Lance, and Tiancheng Cai. 2015. “White Entry into Black Neighborhoods:
Advent of a New Era? ”Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sci-
ence 660 (1): 302 –18.
Gillen, Kevin C., and John A. Westrum. 2014. “Fiscal Analysis of Philadelphia ’s Ten-
Year Property Tax Abatement: A Case Study. ”Philadelphia: Fels Institute of Govern-
ment, University of Pennsylvania. http://media.bizj.us/view/archive/philadelphia/pdf
/Abatement_Fiscal_Analysis.pdf.
Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. 2013. “Superstar Cities. ”Ameri-
can Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4): 167 –99.
Hackworth, Jason, and Neil Smith. 2001. “The Changing State of Gentri ﬁcation. ”
Tijdschrift voor economische en sociale geogra ﬁe92 (4): 464 –77.
Helms, Andrew C. 2003. “Understanding Gentri ﬁcation: An Empirical Analysis of the De-
terminants of Urban Housing Renovation. ”Journal of Urban Economics 54 (3): 474 –98.
Henig, Jeffrey R. 1981. “Gentri ﬁcation and Displacement of the Elderly: An Empirical
Analysis. ”Gerontologist 21 (1): 67 –75.
Hunter, Marcus Anthony. 2013. Black Citymakers: How the Philadelphia Negro Changed
Urban America . New York: Oxford University Press.
Hwang, Jackelyn, Michael Hankinson, and Kreg Steven Brown. 2015. “Racial and Spa-
tial Targeting: Segregation and Subprime Lending within and across Metropolitan
Areas. ”Social Forces 93 (3): 1081 –108.
Hwang, Jackelyn, and Jeffrey Lin. 2016. “What Have We Learned about the Causes of
Recent Gentri ﬁcation? ”Cityscape 18 (3): 9 –26.
Hwang, Jackelyn, and Robert J. Sampson. 2014. “Divergent Pathways of Gentri ﬁcation:
Racial Inequality and the Social Order of Renewal in Chicago Neighborhoods. ”Amer-
ican Sociological Review 79 (4): 726 –51.
Hyra, Derek S. 2014. “The Back-to-the-City Movement: Neighbourhood Redevelopment
and Processes of Political and Cultural Displacement. ”Urban Studies 52 (10): 1753 –73.American Journal of Sociology
404

Kan, Kamhon. 1999. “Expected and Unexpected Residential Mobility. ”Journal of Urban
Economics 45 (1): 72 –96.
Kendig, Hal L. 1984. “Housing Careers, Life Cycle, and Residential Mobility: Implica-
tions for the Housing Market. ”Urban Studies 21 (3): 271 –83.
Kneebone, Elizabeth, and Alan Berube. 2013. Confronting Suburban Poverty in Amer-
ica. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Krysan, Maria, and Kyle Crowder. 2018. Cycle of Segregation: Social Processes and Res-
idential Strati ﬁcation . New York: Russell Sage.
Lee, Donghoon, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2010. “An Introduction to the FRBNY
Consumer Credit Panel. ”Staff report 479. Federal Reserve Bank of New York. http://
www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr479.html.
Lees, Loretta. 2000. “A Reappraisal of Gentri ﬁcation: Towards a ‘Geography of Gentri-
ﬁcation. ’”Progress in Human Geography 24 (3): 389 –408.
Ley, David. 1996. The New Middle Class and the Remaking of the Central City . New
York: Oxford University Press.
Logan, John R., and Harvey L. Molotch. 1987. Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy
of Place . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Marcuse, Peter. 1986. “Abandonment, Gentri ﬁcation and Displacement: The Linkages
in New York City. ”Pp. 153 –77 in Gentri ﬁcation of the City , edited by Neil Smith
and Peter Williams. London: Unwin Hyman.
Martin, Isaac William, and Kevin Beck. 2018. “Gentri ﬁcation, Property Tax Limitation,
and Displacement. ”Urban Affairs Review 54 (1): 33 –73.
Martin, Leslie. 2007. “Fighting for Control: Political Displacement in Atlanta ’s Gentrify-
ing Neighborhoods. ”Urban Affairs Review 42 (5): 603 –28.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy M. Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and
the Making of the American Underclass . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Massey, Douglas S., Andrew B. Gross, and Kumiko Shibuya. 1994. “Migration, Segrega-
tion, and the Geographic Concentration of Poverty. ”American Sociological Review
59 (3): 425 –45.
McKinnish, Terra, Randall Walsh, and T. Kirk White. 2010. “Who Gentri ﬁes Low-
Income Neighborhoods? ”Journal of Urban Economics 67 (2): 180 –93.
Mester, Loretta J. 1997. “What ’s the Point of Credit Scoring? ”Business Review 3:3–16.
Mood, Carino. 2010. “Logistic Regression: Why We Cannot Do What We Think We Can
Do, and What We Can Do about It. ”European Sociological Review 26 (1): 67 –81.
Murphy, Alexandra, and Danielle Wallace. 2010. “Opportunities for Making Ends Meet
and Upward Mobility: Differences in Organizational Deprivation across Urban and
Suburban Poor Neighborhoods. ”Social Science Quarterly 91 (5): 1164 –86.
Newman, Kathe, and Elvin K. Wyly. 2006. “The Right to Stay Put, Revisited: Gentri ﬁ-
cation and Resistance to Displacement in New York City. ”Urban Studies 43 (1): 23 –
57.
Owens, Ann. 2012. “Neighborhoods on the Rise: A Typology of Neighborhoods Experi-
encing Socioeconomic Ascent. ”City and Community 11 (4): 345 –69.
Papachristos, Andrew V., Chris M. Smith, Mary L. Scherer, and Melissa A. Fugiero.
2011. “More Coffee, Less Crime? The Relationship between Gentri ﬁcation and Neigh-
borhood Crime Rates in Chicago, 1991 to 2005. ”City and Community 10 (3): 215 –40.
Pattillo, Mary. 2007. Black on the Block: The Politics of Race and Class in the City . Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Pew Charitable Trusts. 2011. “Philadelphia 2011: The State of the City. ”Philadelphia
Research Initiative, Pew Charitable Trusts. http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploaded ﬁles/wwwpewtrustsorg/repo rts/philadelphia_researc h_initiative/philadel
phiacitydatapopulationdemographicspdf.pdf.
Poon, Martha. 2009. “From New Deal Institutions to Capital Markets: Commercial Con-
sumer Risk Scores and the Making of Subprime Mortgage Finance. ”Accounting, Or-
ganizations and Society 34 (5): 654
–74.Unequal Displacement
405

Rossi, Peter H. 1980. Why Families Move . 2d ed. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.
Sampson, Robert J., and Patrick Sharkey. 2008. “Neighborhood Selection and the Social
Reproduction of Concentrated Racial Inequality. ”Demography 45 (1): 1 –29.
Sharkey, Patrick, and Jacob W. Faber. 2014. “Where, When, Why, and for Whom Do
Residential Contexts Matter? Moving Away from the Dichotomous Understandingof Neighborhood Effects. ”Annual Review of Sociology 40 (1): 559 –79.
Slater, Tom. 2009. “Missing Marcuse: On Gentri ﬁcation and Displacement. ”City13 (2–3):
292–311.
Smith, Neil. 1996. The New Urban Frontier: Gentri ﬁcation and the Revanchist City .
London: Routledge.
——— . 1998. “Gentri ﬁcation. ”Pp. 198 –99 in The Encyclopedia of Housing , edited by
Willem van Vliet. London: Taylor & Francis.
Wardrip, Keith, and Robert M. Hunt. 2013. “Residential Migration, Entry, and Exit as
Seen through the Lens of Credit Bureau Data. ”Community Development Studies and
Education discussion paper 13-01. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Wellman, Barry. 1979. “The Community Question: The Intimate Networks of East
Yorkers. ”American Journal of Sociology 84 (5): 1201 –31.
Wherry, Frederick F., Kristin S. Seefeldt, and Anthony S. Alvarez. 2019. Credit Where
It’s Due: Rethinking Financial Citizenship . New York: Russell Sage.
Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass,
and Public Policy . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wodtke, Geoffrey T., David J. Harding, and Felix Elwert. 2011. “Neighborhood Effects
in Temporal Perspective: The Impact of Long-Term Exposure to Concentrated Disad-
vantage on High School Graduation. ”American Sociological Review 76 (5): 713 –36.
Wyly, Elvin K., and Daniel J. Hammel. 1999. “Islands of Decay in Seas of Renewal:
Housing Policy and the Resurgence of Gentri ﬁcation. ”Housing Policy Debate 10
(4): 711 –71.
Zukin, Sharon. 2010. Naked City: The Death and Life of Authentic Urban Places . New
York: Oxford University Press.American Journal of Sociology
406

