 Electronic  copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2717489 
www.liser.luWORKING PAPERSPrivate rental-led 
gentrification in England: displacement, commodification and dispossession
Antoine Paccoud 1, 2
1 LISER, Luxembourg
2 London School of Economics and Political Science, United Kingdomn° 2015-06 December 2015
 Electronic  copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2717489 
 LISER Working Papers are intended to make research findings available and stimulate comments and discussion. 
They have been approved for circulation but are to be considered preliminary. They have not been edited and have not 
been subject to any peer review. 
The views expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect views of LISER. 
Errors and omissions are the sole responsibility of the author(s).
Private rental -led gentrification in Engl and: 
displacement, commodification and  dispossession  
Antoine Paccoud  
London School of Economics and Political Science, LISER  
December 2 015 
 
 
Abstract  
While central to early gentrification studies, the idea that social and tenure changes were inseparably linked 
to displacement has recently fallen out of research in the field. This has led to difficulties in the context of a 
recent shift in the tenure tra jectory associated with gentrification. While the process has historically been 
linked to an increase in home ownership in the UK, the situation today is marked by the return of the private 
rental sector, a return associated with the rise of buy -to-let inv estors, the loss of social housing and quickly 
escalating rents. Gentrification operating in the UK today must thus be thought of as private rental -led 
gentrification – transitions to private rental in the context of social upscaling. This is shown through  a 
detailed comparison of small -area social and tenure  data from the 2001 and 2011 UK Census es. While this 
tenure shift has been documented in gentrifying areas over the years, little is known about its impacts on 
local neighbourhoods. This is a dangerous blind -spot as private rental -led gentrification is more pernicious 
than gentrification linked to ownership: it is currently more widespread and likely to displace poorer 
residents, creates commodified spaces and its production dispossesses low -income owner s.  
 
Key words : gentrification, displacement, tenure, London  
  
Introduction  
While there are many discussions of gentrification as a social change, the process is much less 
often viewed as a change in tenure. But these two dimensions are inseparable: gentrifi cation is 
by definition a social change, but one that can take place through a numb er of different tenure 
trajectories . The issue is that there has been no detailed empirical investigation of the types of 
changes in tenure link ed to gentrification processe s – instead, the concept remains closely tied 
to the idea of home ownership. Viewed in this narrow way, gentrification as a concept does not 
seem to offer much for the analysis of current urban change. In the UK , for example,  recent  
discussions have focuse d on the rise of buy -to-let investors, the loss of social housing and  on 
the affordability of private rents.  
 
To gain more traction on these crucial questions, this paper  draws on a comparison of small -
area social and tenure data from the 2001 and 2011 ce nsuses to argue that g entrification needs 
to be seen as operating through two broad tenure changes in English metropolitan regions: 
transitions either to ownership or to private rental in the context of social upscaling. While the 
first of these forms has been extensively documented in the litera ture on gentrification, much 
less is known about the second. This is a dangerous blind -spot as private rental -led 
gentrification is more pernicious: it is  currently  more widespread and likely to displace poorer 
residents, creates commodified spaces and its production dispossesses low -income owners . 
 
The paper starts by showing the empirical existence of these two types of gentrification in the 
English metropolitan landscape . It then interrogates the gentrification literature’s  current  focus 
on social rather than tenure change, a surprising fact given its establishment at a time when a 
shift to ownership dominated and given the important work done on other tenure trajectories 
in gentrifying areas. The focus then tu rns to an evaluation of private rental -led gentrification . 
The aim here will be to draw out some of the theoretical implications of thinking more broadly 
of gentrification as a process in which social and tenure changes intersect.  
The two gentrifications  in English metropolitan regions  
The return of private renting  
The UK housing market has experienced a marked return of private renting as  a significant 
tenure category since the early 1990s1. This is noteworthy since private renting had almost 
disappeared: wh ile 76% of households privately rented in 1918, only 9% did so in 1991. This 
was compensated by a growth in both social renting and in home ownership – the former 
peaking at 31% of households in 1981 and the latter at 69% of households in 2001. The return 
of private renting was precipitated by the 1988 Housing Act which allowed landlords to more 
easily retake possession of their property and limited the length of tenancies . This form of 
tenure then  increas ed from 9%  of households  in 1991 to 12% in 2001 , and  then to 18%2 in 
2011.  This translates into a 1.7 million rise in the number of households private renting between 
2001 and 2011. These large changes in the tenure structure of UK housing clearly have an 
impact on the way in which gentrification plays out in its neighbourhoods. But as will be shown 
in a later section, the literature on gentrification in the UK has not caught up with the swing 
back to private renting initiated with the 1988 Housing Act.  
This is problematic since the return of private rentin g has trickled down to the neighbourhood 
level, bringing with it new types of tenure changes accompanying gentrification. B etween the 
2001 and 2011 censuses, gentrification accompanied by a transition to or increase in private 
rental has overtaken the more  ‘classical’ type of gentrification associated with incr eases in 
homeownership. T hese two types of gentrification will be referred to as ownership -led 
gentrification (OG) and private rental -led ge ntrification (PRG).  The next section will describe  
the tenure changes associated with OG and PRG and  justify  their treatment as gentrification.  
  
                                                      
1 The figures in this paragraph are from the ONS (2013) . 
2 In London, 26% of households rented privately in 2011, now the second largest tenure category (GLA 2014)  
Tenure changes involved in recent  UK gentrification  
In this study , OG and PRG  are identified according to th e tenure change that accompan ies the 
social upscaling3 of a small census area4. Tenure  types have been aggregated into three main 
categories: owners, social renters  and private renters5. Three  tenure changes6 are associated 
with each type of gentrification respectively: a sole increase in either owned or priv ate rented 
units , a transfer of social rented units to either own ership or private rental , and the replacement 
of owned by private rented dwellings and vice versa . To put it more simply, OG is associated 
with sole increases or transfers to ownership and PR G with sole increases or transfers to private 
rental.  
All of these tenure changes can be understood  as gentrif ication under the right conditions. To 
draw these out, PRG and OG  tenure changes will be assessed using the four criteria of a widely 
used definition of gentrification:  “(1) reinvestment of capital; (2) social upgrading of locale 
by incoming high -income groups; (3) landscape change; and (4) direct or indirect 
displacement7 of low -income groups”  (Davidson and Lees 2005: 1170). The second crite ria is 
already met since the article only focuses on those OAs in which social upscaling has occurred 
between 2001 and 2011. In what follows, the other three criteria will be used to evaluate PRG 
and OG tenure changes.  
The pair of tenure change s most reco gnisably  a form of gentrification  is the  transfer of social 
housing to either private rental (1,744 OAs) or ownership (1,356 OAs). This can occur through 
the sale on the open market by Councils or Housing Associations of social rented dwellings, 
which are then purchased and  either inhabited or put for rent by the new owner. Whether this 
is achieved through refurbishment or by knocking down estates and rebuilding in the same 
place, it is clear that this type of tenure change involves capital reinvestment (1) . Landscape 
change will be more  drastic in the latter case, but even refurbishment will leave a physical trace 
(3). Finally, the loss of social tenants makes it clear that this type of tenure change is 
accompanied by direct disp lacement of low -income group s (4).  
                                                      
3 The method used to identify local areas with social upscaling between 2001 and 2011 can be found in the Appendix.  
4 Output Area s (OA) have a  population of between 100 and 625 people. At this scale,  areas tend to be more homogeneous and  
changes in tenure or social class a re thus more easily identified.  As for all census geographies, changes to OAs are made 
between censuses to reflect population and social change. For the 2011 census, 2.6% of OAs were changed , yielding 114,197 
OAs comparable between 2001 and 2011 . This means that this analysis does not consider social and tenure changes that 
occurred in OAs having undergone a large population change (such as the destruction of large estates, construction of large 
new builds, etc.).  
5 This grouping of tenure catego ries is not unproblematic. For example, Watt (2009) discusses the often contentious transfer 
of Local Authority housing to Registered Social Landlords in London.  
6 See the Appendix  for methodological detail . Another pair of tenure changes was discarded because of its small size: transfers 
of owned and social rented units to private rental (53 OAs) and transfers of social and private rental to ownership (13 OAs).   
7 They are referring to Marcuse’s (1985) ‘exclu sionary displacement’ here.  
Sole increases in priv ate rental or ownership  are achieved if subdivision or rebuilding leads to 
more units of that type, without the  data showing a change in  the other two tenure types (which 
means some units of these types are provided in the new  build or as part of the subdivision). 
Both subdivision  and rebuilding  are clearly a reinvestment of capital (1)  and similarly to the 
case above also involve landscape change (3). Direct displacement is likely to have occurred if 
those leaving the area wer e predominantly renters (either social or private ). Criteria  4 is thus 
met only in areas in which ownership was not the majority tenure in 2001 . This yields 1,853 
OAs for  the sole increases of private rental and 489 OAs for  the sole increases in ownership 
that can be considered gentrifying.  
In the next pair, only the replacement of owned by private rental will be considered in the rest 
of the article as there were only 74 OAs out of the 114,197 OAs in English metropolitan r egions 
which experienced a replacement of private rented by owned  (in itself a sign that the 
momentum is clearly in favour of transitions to private rental) . As will be shown in a later 
section, the transfer of owned to private rental can be understood as a process of buy -to-let. In 
this process, it can be assumed that refurbishment is needed to meet the needs of the incoming 
wealthier residents (1, 3). While  direct displacement cannot be linke d to this tenure change8, it 
can be assumed that buy -to-let in a context of upscaling l eads to rapidly increasing property 
prices. This is likel y to lead to  a very high  risk of direct displacement  in the near future  as 
landlords  increase  rents and  social housing  providers  consider sellin g off stock (4). But t his 
can on ly occur where  non-owners were the majority in both 2001 and 2011, yielding 1,246 
OAs of this type .  
A momentum in favour of private rental -led gentrification  
OG and PRG can thus take a number of forms depending on the tenure change involved, but 
each one displays the necessary features of gentrification. Some of these forms can be linked 
to already existing direct displacement (if there was a depart ure of renters) whi le others  are 
likely to cause direct displacement  in the near future  by increasing  property prices in the area.  
But all can be linked to Marcuse’s (1985) ‘exclusionary displacement’ (when low -income 
groups are no longer able to move  into the area) and ‘pre ssure of  displacement’ (when changes 
in the area  affect households beyond those actually displaced).  
PRG and OG have  distinct spatial distributions in England. The two maps in Figure 1 below 
show the percentages of OAs in English Local Authorities (LAs) in  which there has been OG 
                                                      
8 As it is not possible to tell why owners are leaving the area . 
and PRG between 2001 and 2011  (based on the five tenure changes described above) . As the 
focus of this study is on urban gentrification, only LAs belonging to metropolitan regions are 
included9.  
 
Figure 1: Spatial distribution of  OG and PRG in English metropolitan regions  
What is immediately clear is  that there is a form of gentrification  active over the entirety of the 
English metropolitan landscape. But this breadth of operation can be attributed to PRG rather 
than to OG. Indeed , tenure changes linked to OG are barely found in Greater London and in 
other urban centres in the Southern half of the UK. In contrast, PRG is occurring in urban 
centres and metropolitan fringes alike, and in each of the English regions. PRG has taken cen tre 
stage in the gentrification of English metropolitan regions.  
But t his is a situation that has not been adequately treated by the gentrification literature, for 
which gentrification is  either  still closely tied to a transition to ownership  or has uncoupled  
from tenure change altogether . The need to think through the implications of PRG  comes out 
clearly in this footnote to a study of London between 1981 and 2001: “ in the UK, it has been 
traditional to equate gentrification with owner -occupation whi ch has not been the case in 
North America. It might be that the conception of gentrification now needs to include those 
who rent in such areas; given the growth of this tenure during 1991 –2001, this would seem 
                                                      
9 To identify LAs belonging to metropolitan regions, the method  in Paccoud (2011)  was used . This method uses 
satellite imagery to visually identify those LAs that have a significant proportion of built -up land and which are 
contiguous to a large urban settlement.  

reasonable”  (Butler et al. 2008: 86). The next section provides an overview of the treatment 
of tenure  change  in gentrification research.  
Gentrification and tenure change  
Glass first identified the process of gentrification in 1963 London, just as home ownership had 
started to increase in a city wher e there were still more private renters than owners. Over half 
a century later, the recent return to private renting in the UK signals a need to rethink a concept 
which has remained bound to home ownership. The assumed link between gentrification and 
home ownership was only contingent – as the discussion below will show, other tenure changes 
have been found in gentrifying areas. What is surprising is that recent approaches to 
gentrification have de -emphasised tenure change in gentrifying areas.   
Gentrificat ion as home ownership in the UK  
Glass ’ initial definition of gentrification clearly established the process as concerned with 
ownership: properties “ have been taken over, when their leases have expired, and have become 
elegant, expensive residences"  (Glass  1988: 138 ). Elsewhere, the focus on ownership is even 
more explicit. In the context of a “switch from suburban to urban aspirations”  (Glass 1988: 
154):  “it is such upper and middle class people, especially, who think of acquiring - and who 
indeed need and  can afford to acquire - some of sort of a home, if only a pied à terre, near 
their places of work ” (Glass 1988: 141).   
What is interesting however, is that Glass thought that the “new demand for homes near the 
metropolitan centre is bound to remain largely unsatisfied”  (Glass 1988: 154), an illustration 
of the relative marginality of the phenomenon at that time. This was before the introduction of 
Mortgage Interest Relief At S ource (MIRAS) in 1969 which was so effective in encouraging 
home ownership.  In 1969 also, a new Housing Act was introduced which provided incentives 
for improvement grants, which Hamnett (1973) found to be strongly linked to gentrification . 
These new  polic ies seem to have led to a shift in real estate investment strategies: “as t he return 
on rented property steadily fell behind comparable investment opportunities, landlords by their 
own volition or by the prompting of their agents sought to gain vacant possession and sell”  
(Williams 1976: 72). The Rent Act 1977 – which prevented u nlawful eviction and re -
establish ed some security of tenure – pushed investors even more strongly towards ownership.  
Thus, by the early 1980s, and until the 1988 Housing Act which revalued private rental 
opportunities, gentrification in the UK was occurri ng in a context in which “previously rented 
property with or without vacant possession became available in large quantities in these inner 
areas, and because of the relatively low price, good location, and other factors they were 
purchased for owner occupa tion”  (Hamnett and Williams 1980: 483). Gentrification in 
London, between 1961 and 1981, was thus closely tied to a “process of tenurial transformation 
from private renting to owner occupation”  (Hamnett 1986: 403) . This occurred to such a large 
extent beca use landlords operated as  “rational profit maximizers, closely in tune with 
competing investment opportunities ” (Hamnett and Randolph 1984: 269) . This is the context 
in which Bridge could assert when looking back on the 1980s “there is a striking tenure shift 
away from council and private rental tenures in favour of owner -occupation” (Bridge 1994: 
40). 
So while it was normal for gentrification to be tied to ownership in this period of ‘flat break -
up’, w hat is interesting is that gentrification has continued to be tied to homeownership, even 
with the return  of private renting  (and in the context of the significant tax advantages available 
to buy-to-let investors ). UK-based gentrification research seems to have carried forward the 
initial, and contingent, link between gentrification and ownership. In 1991, even though Warde 
distinguished between “the activities of large -scale property developers who buy a large tract 
of land to build a condominium and those of individual households t hat buy an old house in an 
'improving neighbourhood' and set about restoring it”  (Warde 1991: 224), the fact remains 
that the end state of both these properties will still be owner -occupation. The focus seems to 
have shifted to the “ question of why individ ual owner gentrifiers undertake gentrification ” 
(Hamnett 1992: 118).  And in  the study of middle class gentrifiers in London, Butler and 
Robson (2001, 2003) seem to have excluded non -gentrifiers (and thus renters) from their in -
depth interviews, something w hich can also be found in Bondi (1999).  
Hamnett and Butler ’s (2010 ) remark that recent growth in private rental in London was “ a 
dramatic turnaround from previous decades and the result of both the establishment of assured 
tenancies and the re -emergence of private landlordism in Britain through what is known as 
‘buy-to-let’”  (Hamnett and Butler 2010: 59-60), has thus not been pick ed by gentrification 
researchers in the UK.  The gentrification imaginary has remained bound to home ownership.  
Gentrification  and tenure change  elsewhere  
While g entrification in the UK has been associated with home ownership only because that 
was the form  of tenure most strongly incentivised  at the time of its early study , the situation 
elsewhere was a little different. Of course, there are many examples of early gentrification 
research in the United State s where it is assumed to be tied  to ownership. For example, 
gentrifiers were often called ‘renovators’ who purchase d inner city housing’  (Laska and Spain 
1980)  or resettlers who were purchasing their first home (Gale 1979), and even Smith (1979) 
refers to gentrifiers as rehabilitators. Here too, surveys an d interviews tar geted homeowners  
only, such as , in Gale (1979) and Laska and Spain (1979): “o nly those people who had bought 
homes in the preceding three years and were occupying these homes were included in the 
survey”  (Laska and Spain 1979: 524).  
But oth er work provided crucial  insights into other tenure changes that could occur in  
gentrifying  areas . A major study here is that of Smith (1979) in Society Hill study in 
Philadelphia. There, he found three ‘gentrifiers’ : (a) professional developers who purchase 
property, redevelop it, and resell for profit; (b) occupier developers who buy and redevelop 
property and inhabit it after completion; (c) landlord developers who rent it to tenants after 
rehabilitation”  (Smith 1979: 546).  The difference between w hat he calls professional and 
landlord developers highlights  the existence of two different types of tenure trajectories in 
gentrifying areas : whatever the initial tenure of the property, gentrification can occur with 
either its transfer to ownership or wi th its transfer to private rental . This is similar to the findings 
of DeGiovanni and Paulson’s (1984) comparative study of gentrifying neighbourhoods in 
Philadelphia and Atlanta: “renters in revitalizing neighborhoods may be forced to move if the 
property is sold and converted to owner -occupancy, rehabilitated for higher -income renters , 
or converted to condominiums or cooperatives”  (DeGiovanni and Paulson 1984: 218).  What 
is missing here, and which will be attempted in the third section of this paper, is a discussion 
of how these tenure trajectories may have different impacts on local neighbourhoods.  
A number of interesting studies were conducted in Australia: by Logan in 1982,  Maher in 1985  
and Engels in 1999 . For Logan, the issue was that the consensual d efinition of gentrification 
included ‘rising occupancy status’ as one of it s key characteristics but that he was not finding 
any marked transition to ownership in the areas he investigated. Instead, he concluded that 
“changes in the rental householder popu lation explain much of the ‘emergence of a new gentry 
class’ in inner Melbourne, particularly in the most traditionally working -class”  (Logan 1982: 
86). Maher (1985) was in a similar situation: “ if a move to owner occupancy is a basic element 
of the gentri fication process, then that is not what is happening in inner Melbourne”  (Maher 
1985: 7). Engel’s (1999) detailed work on the process of gentrification in a S ydney  suburb 
contradicted the “popular view that the gentrification process is driven purely by ow ner-
occupiers, not by small -scale absentee owners and their middle -class tenants”  (Engels 1999: 
1490). What is so interesting about this work is that it explicitly argues that “there can be more 
than one trajectory to neighbourhood change associated with gentrification”  (Engels 1999: 
1479). In their own way, all three of these studies had already identified transitions to private 
rental -led gentrification.  
Another interesting example is Clark’s (1992) study of gentrification in Stockholm with its 
focus on  conversion s from rental to tenant ownership  which can take two forms. Either “the 
tenants take the initiative to form a tenant -owner association and purchase the property in 
accordance with the tenants' right of pre -emption”  (Clark 1992: 23)  or a landlord  “first empties 
a building of tenants in order to do a total modernisation of the building, and then sells to a 
tenant -owner association”  (Clark 1992: 23). Even more imp ortant is Clark’s (1992) point that 
these have different effects, even though both look  similar in aggregate statistics – both lead to 
gentrification and follow a simi lar tenure trajectory. H ow gentrification is produced thus 
becomes crucial, a point that will be returned to in a later discussion on buy -to-let 
gentrification.  
In all these c ases gentrification occurred through tenure trajectories in which ownership was 
not the central component. Instead, many of these studies discuss a type of gentrification much 
closer to the PRG discussed in this article. It thus is surprising that  recent g entrification research 
has on the whole distanced itself from tenure change.  
Gentrification without tenure  change  
More recent g entrification research has favoured definitions of gentrification based on the 
change in the socioeconomic characterist ics of the  resident population. The debate between 
Ley and Smith in the late 1980s is a good illustration of this new orientation. While Ley (1986) 
used “ a change in household social status, independent of the housing stock involved, which 
might be either renovated or redeveloped units”  (Ley 1986: 526) as an indicator for 
gentrification, Smith (1987) thought that gentrification is “not only a social change but also, 
at the neighborhood scale, a physical change in the housing stock and an economic change in 
the land a nd housing markets ” (Smith 1987: 463) . His ‘fix’ entailed looking  at rent and income 
measures, indicators put to the test in his Harlem s tudy (Schaffer and Smith 1986). The crucial 
point here is that tenure seems to have dropped out of the analysis of gent rification. This rest 
of this section will show  how this can be problematic.  
Recent  attempts to broaden out gentrification  have at times stretched the concept a little too 
far. For example, it is not clear that super -gentrification – “the transformation of  already 
gentrified, prosperous and solidly upper -middle -class neighbourhoods into much more 
exclusive and expensive  enclaves ” (Lees 2003: 2487)  – really involves the type of social 
change usually associated with gentrification. It doesn’t seem to be linke d to tenure change or 
displacement either: “there is little evidence of continued social displacement in Barnsbury – 
the stock of suitable housing has long been converted ” (Butler and Lees 2006: 469). A similar 
question can be asked about new -build gentrif ication, which involves “ the large -scale 
deployment of economic capital by developers ” (Davidson and Lees 2005)  but in which 
building is done on reclaimed land. This means that there is no base from which social (or 
tenure) change could be observed. What i s problematic in the case of new -build gentrification 
is that the concept ends up conflating self -contained developments on brownfield sites – 
“neighbourhood considerations are significant because of their abse nce in this form of 
gentrification” (Davidson 2007) – with developments that come to replace demolished council 
estates such as Aylesbury  (Davidson and Lees 2010: 403). The latter involves a social and 
tenure change (and thus displacement), the former features neither. A clear presence of  tenure 
and s ocial change (and of course displacement) might need to be made more central to 
definitions of gentrification to ma ke sure the concept isn’t accused of being ‘chaotic’ again 
(Rose 1984) . 
In the case of two other research strands, the focus has shifted to h ighly salient forms of social 
change, perhaps to the detriment of more ordinary forms of displacement. One of these is the 
focus on gentrification as a mode of cultural consumption. For Mills, gentrification is deeply 
implicated in the “the 'discovery' of ever-new scarce commodities which can act as vehicles 
for status”  (Mills 1988: 186), for Zukin it is in part “ a mode of high -status cultural 
consumption ” (Zukin 1987: 144). But both of these accounts are focused on very specific 
building types – historical  or architecturally distinct for Zukin, pos t-modern architecture in 
Mills – thus perhaps  obscuring the production of gentrified landscapes that are more functional 
and commodified than status -enhancing. This is paralleled in the idea that gentrification ha s 
recently entered a third wave  (Hackworth and Smith  2001 ), in which the state now plays a 
significant role . This has perhaps given the state too much attention. For example, Watt (2013) 
speaks of a ‘state induced rent gap’ to refer to the contrast between  the current use of land as a 
council estate and its “potentially large value if only the resident base could be made to 
change”  (Watt 2013: 102).  But i n ‘selling’ an estate to a developer, the local state may only be 
reacting to budget ary shortfalls and a  rent gap created by intense private activity around the 
site to raise property values. Focusing on  the most visible forms of change should not obscure 
more ordinary forms of displacement . This point will be returned to in the next section in the 
context o f an estimate of OG and PRG induced displacement.  
The final strand of gentrification research to be discussed here is that which emerged from 
Lees’ early comparative work (Lees 1994), and which has broadened to a focus on ‘geographies  
of gentrification ’ (Lees 2000),  gentrification and c omparative urbanism (Lees 2012)  and more 
recently o n global gentrifications (Lees et al. 2015 ). And while tenure trajectories played an 
importan t role in the early comparison – “the leasehold system in England affects the timing of  
gentrification and the tenure system the flow of gentrification, this is less  apparent in the US ” 
(Lees 1994: 2 15) – this seems to have slowly dropped out of  more recent work . But it seems 
as though the comparison of gentrification processes acro ss different contexts would be 
strengthened if it ensured that similar types of tenure trajectories  were being compared. For 
example, there might be more differences between OG and PRG in England than between 
forms of PRG in cities in completely different geographical contexts  
Recent strands of gentrification research have thus distanced themselves from considerations 
of tenure change. This is both surprising given the important studies which centred on tenure 
trajectories other than those to ownership and problematic given the issues that accompany a 
neglec t of tenure change: concept stretching, a focus on the highly visible and more difficult 
comparison s. To show the importance  of considering tenure change alongside social change in 
the study of gentrifica tion, the next section will discuss the differences between OG and PRG. 
The key point is that PRG is more pernicious than OG for three main reasons: it is more likely 
to displace poorer residents, creates commodified spaces and dispossesses low -income owne rs.  
Private rental gentrification: an evaluation  
More likely to displace  
This section will show than in addition to being more widespread in English metropolitan 
regions PRG is al so associated with a higher burden  of displacement for low -income 
populations, especially as concerns the risk of direct  displaceme nt linked to buy -to-let. As table  
1 below indicates10, both OG and PRG are associated with potentially large numbers of directly 
                                                      
10 Direct displacement is defined as the forced movement of low -income renters (either social or private) due either to the 
destruction of the dwelling the y inhabited (either for purposes of subdivision or new build construction) or to its sale by 
Councils of Housing Associations. Direct displacement is thus estimated as the number of low -income individuals lost in OAs 
where social and private renters were e ither the majority in 2001 or those who left the area in greatest numbers. These figures 
do not take into account those displaced from projects that involved population numbers large enough to render 2001 -2011 
OA level comparison impossible. Using Marcuse’ s (1985) ‘last -resident displacement’ only (and thus not ‘chain 
displaced low -income residents.  While the average loss per OA is actually higher in OG tenure 
changes (25.3) than in PRG tenure changes (21.5), the danger of PRG is clearly apparent in the 
significant ly larger  displacement associated with s ole increases in private rental (30,313) rather  
than in ownership (9,211). Though this tenure change has the lowest average loss per OA 
(16.4), it points to a process that may be occurring under the radar of current gentrification 
studies (which as discussed in the section above tends to focus on highl y visible changes ). 
Subdivisions and small new builds  – ordinary displacement – tend to be less noticed but, as a 
whole, also contribute heavily towards the displacement occurring under PRG.  
 
Table 1: Estimates of direct displacement linked to OG and PRG  
Tenure change  Type of 
gentrification  OAs with 
potential 
displac ement  Estimated 
number of 
displaced 
(2001 -2011)  Average 
number 
displaced by 
OA 
Sole increase in private rental where 
ownership was not the majority 
tenure in 2001  PRG  1,853  30,313  16.4 
Private rented replacing social 
rented  PRG  1,744  47,105  27 
Total PRG   3,597 77,418  21.5 
Sole increase in owned where 
ownership was not the majority 
tenure in 2001  OG 489 9,211  18.8 
Owner replacing social rented  OG 1,356  37,468  27.6 
Total  OG  1,845  46,679  25.3 
 
But the clearest indication of the higher potential for PRG to lead to displacement can be found 
in buy -to-let areas, which ha ve no significant equivalent in OG. As detailed early in the article, 
buy-to-let occurring in non -owner majority areas can be linked  to a risk of direct  displacement 
because it can lead to rent increases (which threaten low -income private renters) and sales of 
Council or Housing Association property (which affect social renters).  In the 1,246 non -owner 
majority OAs in which there was evidence of a process of buy -to-let between 2001 and 2011, 
there are an estimated 115,25211 low-income residents aged 16 -74  sti ll renting  in 2011  (either 
privately or socially). As more of the remaining owned units are inhabited by wealthy tenants, 
the pressure on private rents and social housing will continue to increase. While not all  of these 
residents will have to leave the ar ea because of buy -to-let in the short term , this process will 
clearly lead to a long -term transformation of these areas – again pointing to the operation of 
                                                      
displacement’) seems appropriate in this context as the tenure change likely to have led to the forced departure of the previ ous 
occupant is only assumed to have happened once in the decade be tween the two censuses.  
11 This number may be lower given that some of these low -income residents may be owners, but may be higher if the knock -
on effect of increasing housing prices on proximate areas (and their social and private renters) could be factore d in. 
‘ordinary displacement’. PRG thus  seems to  more seriously undermine the ability of poorer 
residents  to remain in the city than at any other point in the ‘age of gentrification’. And this 
displacement has  impact ed some groups more than others12. 
What is worrying is that PRG is being intensified by Coalition government programmes: Help 
to Buy (linked to ra pidly increasing property prices), the revitalisation of the Right to Buy 
(which threatens the remaining social housing stock) and Welfare Reform. The latter is 
especially problematic as it puts the new private rental dwellings largely out of reach of the 
most marginalised. Hamnett (2010) has drawn out the implications of the housing benefit 
reform: “low-income households on H ousing Benefit  will be effectively excluded from the 
private -rented sector in much of central London, reinforcing the impact of chang es in social 
class and high house prices on the social and tenure structure of London ” (Hamnett 2010: 
2818). And Fenton et al (2013) have described the commodification of social renting that is 
currently occurring through the “ move to personal subsidies fo r open -market renting ”, a trend 
which “means that the socio -spatial organisation of the city is more decisively determined by 
market pricing, as well as diminishing security and determination for low -income tenants”  
(Fenton et al 2013: 377) . The displaceme nt pressures associated with PRG will thus only 
exacerbate and be exacerbated by these government programmes.  
Creating commodified  spaces  
In addition to being more likely to displace, PRG impacts neighbourhoods in a manner very 
different to OG. This can be  seen by focusing on their different temporalities and on the agents 
involved.  OG can be thought of as both immediate and slow: with its inhabitation by the new 
wealthy owner, gentrification is realised, but its benefits only materialise  in the long term w hen 
the property is sold on. In co ntrast, PRG is delayed but fast. The property is only truly gentrified 
with the arrival of a tenant paying rent equal to proximate h igh-income areas, which may be 
achieved only after a sequence of tenants paying increasing  rents. But as long as tenants are 
secured, rental returns are received quickly.  There are thus also different agents involved  in 
sealing the gentrification process: in OG, it is the purchaser who is likely to stay in the area 
over the mid - to long -term wh ile in PRG it is the sequence of short -term tenants. This has an 
implication for who is to be considered the ‘gentrifier’ in PRG . The starting point should be 
Smith’s call to see gentrifiers as the “producers of gentrified properties – builders, property 
owners, estate agents, local governments, banks and building societies”  (Smith 1992: 113 ). 
                                                      
12 For a comparison of the movements of first and second generation migrants of selected ethnicities in London 
between 2001 and 2011, see Paccoud (2014).  
The question then becomes: can PRG tenants be added to the list of ‘producers of gentrified 
properties’ ? 
Looking back at Smith’s (1979) “landlord developers who rent it to tenants after 
rehabilitation”  (Smith 1979: 546), the answer seems to be no – gentrification  is only the act of 
rehabilitation  by the landlord. But PRG cannot be reduced to rehabilitation alone. While 
modern new -builds and renovated terraced housing m ay attract relatively wealthier tenants, the 
area remains majority low -income and there must be a limit to the rent that can be demanded. 
Gentrification is not achieved until the ‘rent al income ’ gap has been closed between the current 
rent and what could b e asked if the area  were predominantly high -income (such as what is 
achieved in already gentrified proximate areas with similar accessibility and built form). 
Tenants thus play  an important part in making sure the initial rehabilitated unit becomes a 
gentrified property: they accept rents and possibly rent increases, passively (or actively) 
produce a change in the offer of goods and services and informally market the area throug h 
social interaction. From this perspective, each individual tenant in PRG areas is participating 
in the process. It thus seems as though PRG necessitates a broadening out  of Smith’s (1992) 
‘producers of gentrified properties’ to account both for ‘direct p roduction’ (developers, 
landlords, estate agents, etc.) and ‘indirect production’ (tenants).  
Viewing tenants in PRG areas are indirect producers of gentrified properties makes it possible 
to think of  PRG as ‘gentrification at a distance’. Neither the devel oper/landlord nor any 
particular tenant is present throughout the entirety of the gentrification process – as the owner 
in OG necessarily is. Gentrification thus becomes faceless and more insensitive to the 
attachment of low -income groups to place. PRG has  the potential to depoliticise gentrification 
and the displacement it causes by removing a ‘palpable’ gentrifier from the process. Former 
low-income residents are steadily replaced by a sequence of increasingly wealthy tenants who 
may have little sense of how the area, and its residents, used to be.  
But this also means that ‘gentrification at a distance’ has a distinctive effect on local use values. 
While the immediate gentrification in OG means that there has been a significant buy -in to the 
area, and that  the new owner has a stake in its mid- to long-term development , with PRG the 
fact is that neither the direct nor the indirect producer have such an interest.  Both  are geared 
towards the short term , a reflection of the fact that current legislation provide s little security of 
tenure and imposes no limits on rent increases. This favours the direct producer’s attempts to 
close the ‘rental income’ gap: tenant churn is likely to be high, which offers opportunities for 
rent increases as the area as a whole loses  its low -income population. The direct producer is 
likely to build or refurbish the property to a high enough standard to entice high -income renters 
but may then minimise maintenance once tenants are secured, what can be called ‘strategic 
maintenance’. The  indirect producer may also be in a short -term orientation, with some 
populations, such as graduates or recent wealthier migrants, likely to rent for a while before 
setting down more permanent roots.  
This is not to say that private rental cannot be associa ted with investment in local use values  
but only to highlight that the conditions of PRG push both direct and indirect producers of 
gentrified properties to disinvest from the dwelling and the local area more generally. This 
tends to create commodified and functional landscapes that serve the needs of a new and 
wealthier transient population rather than those of the more established population.  And 
although neither direct nor indirect producers invest in local use values, gentrification  – and its 
attached d isplacement pre ssures on low -income population – is in operation.   
Dispossessing  low-income owners  
Another  important question is raised by the PRG tenure change described as the transfer of 
owned units to private rental. As highlighted in the case of Clark  (1992), it is important to look 
more closely at how similar outcomes may be differently produced. In this case, two 
possibilities exist: either the low -income owner put s the property for rent (what can be called 
‘incumbent landlordism’) or this owner sell s the property to a new owner who puts it for rent 
(what is referred to as ‘buy -to-let’). The first scenario opens the possibility that this form of 
PRG may in some way benefit the low -income owners in gentrifying areas. This would be 
unique to the current  gentrification landscape as all of the other four tenure changes identified 
involve the investment of significant amounts of capital, no matter whether the units end up 
inhabited by the owner or by a tenant.  
However, the evidence clearly points to a pred ominance of buy -to-let in these areas. This can 
be shown by looking at the type of low -income owner which left the area between 2001 and 
2011. The assumption here is that a low -income owner can only afford to offer the property for 
rent if it is already ow ned in full. Rental income can then be used to pay a mortgage on (or 
rent) another property13. A departure of low -income owners who fully owned their property 
can thus be associated with a capture of the rental income by these individuals. On the other 
hand, if the owner still has a mortgage to p ay on the property, selling and transferring the 
                                                      
13 It is assumed that the owner has the capital required for refurbishment.  
mortgage to another property seems the more likely scenario. This means that the gains from 
rental income are captured by the new, capital -rich, owner.  
Using this  method, it was found that 39.9% of OAs have seen an exclusive decrease of owners 
with a mortgage (497 OAs) and a further 28.7% a majority14 decrease of such properties (357 
OAs). 68.5% of OAs with this tenure change are thus serving new (and presumably cap ital-
rich) owners rather than the low -income owners that once lived in the area. In only 4.2% of 
OAs (52) and 6.7% of OAs (83) has there been a sole or majority departure of fully owning 
low-income owners respectively. The remaining 19.7% of OAs (246) have  witnessed 
departures of both types of owners15. Buy -to-let rather than low -income owners putting their 
properties for rent thus seems to account for the vast majority of transfers of owned to private 
rental, dispossessing low -income owners of potential ren tal income. It is clear that this type of 
PRG can only be produced by those with enough capital to focus on more than one property at 
the same time, and not ‘incumbent landlords’.  
It might thus be time to strip the idea of gentrification of its social mobi lity imaginary, the idea 
that it is an enrichment strategy open to the many. The issue is that the commonly used 
definitions do not clearly make a distinction between users and producers of gentrified 
properties, thus leaving open the possibility that some  of the gentrifiers are either ‘owner 
occupiers’ or ‘incumbent landlords’. For example, for Clark, “gentrification is a process 
involving a change in the population of land -users such that the new users are of a higher 
socio -economic status than the previo us users, together with an associated change in the built 
environment through a reinvestment in fixed capital”  (Clark 2005: 263). This definition clearly 
accommodates the three types of gentrifiers Smith (1979) identified, as well as gentrification 
produce d by an incumbent landlord. But even Smith’s (2000) definition – “the reinvestment 
of capital at the urban centre, which is designed to produce space for a more affluent class of 
people than currently occupies that space”  (Smith 2000: 294) – and that by Da vidson and 
Lees’ (2005) quoted early in the paper and which both focus more heavily on capital 
reinvestment do not allow for a distinction to be made between  relatively  minute amounts of 
capital invested by an incumbent landlord to prepare the dwelling for  private re ntal and the 
capital needed to destroy a council estate and rebuild in its place . Both ‘injections of capital’ 
serve the same purpose of producing “ space for a more affluent class of people than currently 
occupies that space”  (Smith 2000: 294), but with very different social consequences.  
                                                      
14 A majority decrease here is defined as a decrease in one type of owner that is over twice as large as the other.  
15 There were 98,250  owners with a mortgage and 46,187  fully owni ng in 2001 in these OAs.  
Emphasising that the reinvestment of capital in gentrifying areas comes from capital -rich 
sources, and is thus dispossessing low -income owners, might be a way to make this distinction 
clearer.  
Conclusions  
There  are thus two gentrifications occurring simultaneously in English metropolitan regions, 
but only OG has been adequately treated in the gentrification literature. This is problematic 
since disregarding tenure change in the study of social change can lead to  concept stretching, 
a focus on the highly visible forms of gentrification and can become an obstacle to the 
comparison of gentrification processes in different places. But it is also an issue because PRG 
is in many ways more pernicious than OG: it is asso ciated with more wides pread displacement, 
creates  commodified spaces and dispossesses low -income owners.  
This paper thus provides some evidence on the way in which PRG has re -intensified the 
impacts of gentrification in the UK metropolitan system. With mor e returns on investment now 
available through buy -to-let, the transfer of council estates to private rental and the 
intensification of the offer of private rental units, gentrification has latched on to a different set 
of tenure trajectories. These have ha d the consequence of increasing the polarisation of the 
cities it has affected, especially th rough displacement, both past and to come. This offers a 
strong rebuke to the claim that “ the polarisation thesis has proved extremely influential, 
although its ev idential basis is sometimes shaky and often runs contrary to the picture provided 
by official statistic s” (Butler, Hamnett and Ramsden 2008: 69).  
And it lends credence to an approach which centres on the ability of gentrification to adapt 
itself to the ch anging policy environment, and thus to the relative investment opportunities of 
different tenure trajectories. An  adaptation that is  allowed to occur because  “the construction 
of new gentrification complexes in central cities across the world has become an  increasingly 
unassailable capital accumulation strategy for competing urban economies ” (Smith 2002: 
443). PRG can be stopped if rent controls and more secure private rental tenancies are reinstated 
– but gentrification will continue as long as real estate  remains “ a centrepiece of the city’s 
productive economy, an end in itself ” (Smith 2002: 443).  
