Accepted: 17 February 2020
DOI: 10.1002/psp.2327
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Neighbourhood gentrification, displacement, and poverty
dynamics in post-recession England
Mark Fransham
International Inequalities Institute, London
School of Economics & Political Science,
London, UK
Correspondence
Mark Fransham, International Inequalities
Institute, London School of Economics and
Political Science, London, UK.
Email: m.fransham@lse.ac.uk
Funding information
Economic and Social Research Council,
Grant/Award Number: ES/J500112/1;
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council, Grant/Award Number:
EP/K503113/1, EP/L505031/1 and
EP/M50659X/1Abstract
A recent ‘‘return to the city’’ by middle-class professionals in England, with the
increasing ‘‘suburbanisation’’ of poverty and an ongoing housing crisis, has increased
the salience of concerns about neighbourhood gentrification via the involuntary
displacement of established working class residents. This paper reports a systematic
analysis of gentrification and income poverty in England that adopts innovative
methodological approaches: a multivariate index of gentrification, propensity score
matching to establish a comparison group, and sensitivity testing with respect to
different ‘‘gentrification’’ definitions. The paper investigates three possible theoretical
processes that could have driven the observed decline in income poverty rates in
gentrifying areas: inward mobility to areas, outward mobility from areas, and in situ
changes in poverty status. The post-recession period 2010–2014 is studied using data
from the UK Household Longitudinal Study. There is good evidence from aggregate
and individual-level analyses for a relationship between ‘‘inward’’ mobility, poverty
status, and area gentrification. In addition, people moving to gentrifying areas were
more likely to have a university degree and more likely to be in the professional
occupational class than people who moved to nongentrifying comparison areas. On
the other hand, no such relationships are found for ‘‘outward’’ mobility. The strongest
evidence is found for ‘‘exclusionary displacement’’ (the restricted ability of low-income
households to move in to an area) rather than ‘‘direct displacement’’ (increased
outward mobility of existing residents) as the dominant driver of gentrification in this
period.
KEYWORDS
gentrification, longitudinal analysis, migration, neighbourhood change, poverty dynamics,
residential mobility
1 INTRODUCTION
With a ‘‘return to the city’’ in the last 20 years increasing the popula-
tion of young professionals living in central urban areas (Rae, 2013),
accompanied by observations that poverty is increasingly ‘‘subur-
banised’’ (Bailey & Minton, 2018) and an ongoing '‘housing crisis’’ in
which secure and decent housing is more difficult to access (Dorling,
2014), concerns about the ill-effects of gentrification on established
working class communities in England are highly salient. Gentrifying
areas that had previously been home to low-income, working-classresidents have sharply falling rates of poverty (Fenton, 2016), assumed
to be evidence that low-income households are being forced to leave
their homes as a result of rising rental prices, evictions by unscrupu-
lous landlords, or social housing demolition by entrepreneurial public
bodies.
The phenomenon of gentrification has been studied at a small scale
by many qualitative researchers who have documented some of these
processes. Large scale quantitative studies of the United States and
mainland Europe have attempted to disentangle the role of different
processes in gentrification (e.g., Freeman, 2005; Hochstenbach &
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/psp ©2020JohnWiley&Sons,Ltd 1o f1 3
https://doi.org/10.1002/psp.2327PopulSpacePlace.2020;26:e2327.
2o f1 3 FRANSHAM
Van Gent, 2015), but despite the widespread interest, there are few
examples of a comprehensive analysis of gentrification processes in the
United Kingdom. Much attention has been paid to the role of forced
outward residential mobility from areas as gentrification occurs, yet
there are other ways in which changes in the population composition
of a neighbourhood can occur. Where neighbourhood characteristics
remain static, it means that the type of people leaving an area are
similar to the type of people who arrive in their place. Consequently,neighbourhood change can occur when one or both of the inward
and outward flows change, creating an imbalance. Neighbourhood
composition can also be altered by in situ changes in population
characteristics, for example, a reduction in the incidence of poverty
due to improved labour market conditions.
This paper reports a systematic analysis of gentrification and income
poverty in England in the post-recession period. It adopts a number
of innovative methodological approaches: a multivariate index of
gentrification, propensity score matching to establish a comparisongroup of nongentrifying areas, and testing the sensitivity of findings
to a variety of different ‘‘gentrification’’ definitions. Drawing upon the
observation that many gentrifying areas have seen a decline in income
poverty rates, it investigates three possible theoretical processes that
could have driven this change: inward mobility to areas, outward
mobility from areas, and in situ changes in poverty status over time.
2 GENTRIFICATION AND DISPLACEMENT:
DEFINITIONS AND EMPIRICAL FINDINGS
Since Ruth Glass coined the term gentrification over 50 years ago
(Glass, 1964), a large literature has developed, which has explored
the nature, causes, processes, and consequences of the phenomenon.
The ‘‘classic’’ gentrification that Ruth Glass wrote about was charac-terised by middle-class households moving in to upgrade old, rundown
housing in inner-city urban areas, changing the tenure of housing
from rented to owner-occupied and the composition of the area from
working-class to middle-class (Lees, Slater, & Wyly, 2008: 10-30).
Scholars have broadened out the term to include new-build hous-
ing in previously working-class areas (Davidson & Lees, 2010), rural
and suburban areas, gentrification via the rental market, and state-led
rather than market-led processes (Hochstenbach, 2016). This makes
gentrification ‘‘a slippery term’’ (Lees et al., 2008: 3) with multiple com-peting definitions. Perhaps in acknowledgement, many take a broad
view of the nature and location of phenomena that can be termed
gentrification:
‘‘a class-based phenomenon whereby lower status neighbourhoods
change to higher status ones’’ (Freeman, Cassola, & Cai, 2016, p. 2803)
‘‘the transformation of a working-class or vacant area of a city into a
middle-class residential and/or commercial use’’ (Slater, 2009, p. 294)
‘‘changes in the composition and character of urban localities in
favour of newer residents with more resources and at the expense ofexisting residents with fewer resources’’ (Fenton, 2016: 7)
Gentrification can be viewed positively, as a way to improve disad-
vantaged neighbourhoods by attracting investment and the spending
power of higher income residents (Freeman, 2005), reduce vacancy
rates, increase local tax revenues thereby increasing public investment,reduce suburban sprawl, and increase social mix (Atkinson & Bridge,
2005, p. 5). It can also be viewed negatively as a source of community
resentment and cause of population loss in other areas (Atkinson &
Bridge, 2005, p. 5). Central to the critical view of gentrification is the
concern that it necessarily involves the involuntary ‘‘displacement’’ of
lower income households from gentrifying areas that they previously
called home (Slater, 2009). Ruth Glass’ original work is the classic
exposition of this:
‘‘one by one, many of the working class quarters of London have
been invaded by the middle classes
…once this process of ‘gentrifica-
tion’ starts in a district it goes on rapidly until all or most of the original
working class occupiers are displaced and the social character of the
district is changed’’ (Glass, 1964)
Gentrification researchers have elaborated upon this simple idea
of ‘‘displacement,’’ (Marcuse, 1985) distinguishing between ‘‘direct
displacement’’ and indirect, ‘‘exclusionary displacement.’’ Direct dis-
placement occurs where households are involuntarily displaced fromthe gentrifying area where they currently live, for example, through
unaffordable rent increases or eviction. Contemporary concerns are
exemplified by the Heygate Estate in South London, a social hous-
ing estate demolished to be replaced in part by high-cost private
housing (Lees & Ferreri, 2016). Exclusionary displacement occurs
where households are prevented from living in gentrifying areas
where they would have previously sought housing. Direct displace-
ment is thus characterised by a change in the composition of outward
migrants; exclusionary displacement is characterised by a change inthe composition of inward migrants.
Neighbourhood composition can change via three mechanisms
(Hochstenbach, 2016): residential mobility patterns, in situ changes
(e.g., rising income or changing occupation), and demographic change
(e.g., the ageing-out of working class residents). Vigdor, Massey, and
Rivlin (2002) assert that gentrification can provide better employ-
ment opportunities for existing residents, promoting upward in situ
income mobility. Noting the generational shift from working-class to
middle-class occupations, Hamnett (2003) has proposed that gen-trification has principally occurred by ‘‘professionalisation’’, a benign
demographic replacement of the older working class with a younger
middle class.
Operationalised measurements of gentrification vary, frequently
driven by the availability of data as much as theoretical considera-
tions. Ruth Glass used change in housing tenure from rented to owner
occupied to identify gentrification in London. As the middle class is typ-
ically associated with professional occupations, changing occupational
structure within neighbourhoods is a common measure (Atkinson,2000; Freeman et al., 2016; Hamnett, 2003). Gentrification is asso-
ciated with an increase in house prices and rents so these are also
used as indicators (Freeman, 2005; Hamnett, 2003), and an increase in
household incomes is also associated with more affluent residents, as
an ‘‘indicator of position in class relations’’ (Fenton, 2016: 9), so mea-
sures of income (Ellen & Regan, 2011; McKinnish, Walsh, & White,
2010) or the prevalence of income poverty (Fenton, 2016) have been
used. In a study of residential choice in U.S. cities, Clark and Rivers
(2013) use a combination of housing tenure, housing value, poverty,and lone parenthood to measure neighbourhood status. These mea-
sures differ according to whether they measure absolute change or
FRANSHAM 3o f1 3
relative change (e.g., in rank position), and for those that use relative
change, whether changes are measured relative to the entire nation
or a smaller subregion.
A number of quantitative studies have shown little relationship
between gentrification and outward mobility (direct displacement)
of lower income residents. The most recent U.K. study (Freeman
et al., 2016) found no robust relationship between neighbourhood
out mobility, gentrification, and household income or class over theperiod 2001–2009 using the British Household Panel Survey. Similar
findings have been reported in studies of the United States (Ellen &
Regan, 2011; Freeman, 2005; McKinnish et al., 2010; Vigdor et al.,
2002). Slater (2009) has suggested that these quantitative studies fail
to take into account all possible displacement mechanisms and ignore
household coping strategies, whereas Newman and Wyly (2006) have
suggested that the strategies households employ to stay in neighbour-
hoods plus their limited alternative options can mask the impact of
gentrification.
The passionate debate around the direct displacement effects
of gentrification has meant there has been less empirical research
studying other possible processes. Little attention has been paid to
neighbourhood in-mobility, or exclusionary displacement. As popu-
lation turnover is significant in most neighbourhood areas (Bailey &
Livingston, 2007), the difference between a gentrifying and nongen-
trifying neighbourhood could be the composition of in-migrants, not
a change in out-mobility. In a study of U.S. neighbourhoods, Freeman
(2005) found that ‘‘in-movers rather than out-movers are the drivingforce behind neighbourhood change in gentrifying neighbourhoods’’.
Hochstenbach and Van Gent (2015) used Dutch population regis-
ter data to examine the relative importance of different processes
in gentrifying neighbourhoods of Amsterdam and Rotterdam. They
found that residential mobility is much greater in magnitude than in
situ changes or demographic processes but has small net effects that
mostly reproduce neighbourhood composition (Hochstenbach & Van
Gent, 2015, p. 1497). They also found that different processes dom-
inated in different types of gentrifying neighbourhoods in the samecity - there was no single gentrification process.
These different processes have yet to be examined in the literature
on the United Kingdom. Existing quantitative gentrification research
studies the period before the 2008/09 global financial crisis, since
when such processes may have intensified: Household incomes have
stagnated (Hood & Waters, 2017), more low-income households live
in private-rented housing (Tinson et al., 2016), and state subsidies for
home rental costs have been restricted (Hills, De Agostini, & Suther-
land, 2016), such that it may have become more difficult for lowerincome households to access or remain in gentrifying neighbourhoods
(Hamnett, 2010).
This paper builds upon the contribution of Freeman et al. (2016),
who analysed outward residential mobility rates to measure displace-
ment of lower income individuals from gentrifying areas in England
and Wales, in the period 2001–2009. They found no robust rela-
tionship between out-mobility rates for low-income or working-class
individuals and gentrification but did not examine the contribution of
in-mobility rates or in situ changes. Their study identifies gentrifyingareas as those that changed relative to others in England measured
by a single indicator (occupational class) over the period 2001–2011and used longitudinal household survey data 2001–2009 to measure
this. Their study is potentially hampered by the fact they may have
been measuring the process before gentrification had occurred, as
neighbourhood change could have occurred towards the end of the
intercensal period. Freeman et al. (2016) use random effects models
to estimate the ‘‘effect’’ of gentrification at an individual level, con-trolling for other factors associated with residential mobility. They do
not examine aggregate processes, that is, whether taken together,
the mobility patterns of individuals in gentrifying and nongentrify-
ing areas are similar. Finally, they compare gentrifying areas to all
‘‘nongentrifying’’ areas, without establishing whether these areas are
truly comparable. This paper seeks to build on their work by addressing
some of these limitations.
3 STUDY AIMS, DATA, AND METHODS
This paper reports upon a systematic analysis of gentrification andincome poverty in England in the post-recession period 2010 to 2014.
Methodologically, it proposes a comprehensive index of gentrification
measured with reference to local housing market areas rather than the
nation as a whole. It uses propensity score matching to robustly iden-
tify a group of nongentrifying areas with which valid comparisons of
demographic processes can be made. Recognising that the classifica-
tion of an area as gentrifying or not gentrifying is somewhat arbitrary;
a number of different definitions are used to test the sensitivity of the
findings.
Empirically, the paper attempts to understand why previous quan-
titative studies have found little evidence of displacement in the form
of out-mobility of lower income individuals. If this is not the process
driving neighbourhood change, what process is the driver? Drawing
upon the observation that many gentrifying areas have seen a decline
in poverty rates, it focuses on income poverty as the characteristic
of interest and investigates three possible theoretical processes that
could have driven this change. The research questions ask whether
between 2010 and 2014, when compared with nongentrifying areas,were gentrifying areas associated with:
•higher outward mobility rates for income poor individuals?
•lower inward mobility rates for income poor individuals?
•higher rates of poverty exit or lower rates of poverty entry?
3.1 Measuring neighbourhood status
and gentrification
This paper broadly follows the approach of Freeman et al. (2016),
treating gentrification as a class-based phenomenon involving neigh-
bourhood transformation from lower to higher status in the residential
hierarchy. Accepting this definition, the analyst has decisions to make
about how to measure such a concept. Three questions raise their
head: how to define neighbourhoods, within what reference areathe status of that neighbourhood should be measured, and by what
observables should status be determined.
The study pragmatically utilises Lower Super Output Areas (LSOAs)
as proxies for neighbourhood, in common with many studies (Ham,
Manley, Bailey, & Maclennan, 2013, p. 3). There are 32,844 LSOAs,
4o f1 3 FRANSHAM
used for the production of official statistics in England, that contained
an average of 1,500 residents in 2001. The boundaries of these areas
are relatively stable; they were first defined using data from the 2001
Census and redefined following the 2011 Census, but 95% of areas
had the same boundaries between the two sets. Most of the changes
were made by either splitting 2001 LSOAs into two or more or mergingtwo or more 2001 LSOAs into one. For areas that altered between
2001 and 2011, the method used in this study makes comparison
between amalgamated areas. For example, some geographical areas
were covered by a single LSOA in 2001 but by numerous LSOAs in
2011 (i.e., they were split between the two sets). In these cases, the
observations in 2001 are compared with the aggregated observations
for all the LSOAs that covered that area in 2011 (i.e., the 2011 LSOAs
are merged into a single area for the purpose of comparison over time).
If the concept of a neighbourhood hierarchy is accepted, within
what reference frame should neighbourhood status be assessed? The
approach of Freeman et al. (2016) is to assess neighbourhood status
with reference to all other neighbourhoods in England. Given that
most residential moves are within short distances (Fielding, 2012), a
more satisfactory approach is to assess neighbourhood status within a
local housing market area, such that neighbourhood status is assessed
with reference to alternative neighbourhoods into which a residential
move could realistically be made. In this paper, local housing market
areas are approximated by 2011 Travel to Work Areas (TTWAs), areasdefined by 2011 Census data such that the majority of people who
work in the TTWA also live in it and vice-versa. There are 149 TTWAs
in England.
Six different indicators are used to measure neighbourhood (LSOA)
status within the local housing market area (TTWA) in 2001 and
2011. Six indicators are used so that the measure is more robust
to measurement error in any one of them. Three are indicators of
low status: the income poverty rate, the proportion of people living
in social rented housing, and the proportion of adults in the lowestoccupational classes. Three are indicators of high status: housing
prices, the proportion of people living in owner-occupied housing,
and the proportion of adults in the highest occupational classes. Each
LSOA is ranked within the TTWA according to the six indicators.
Ranks are scaled from 0 (lowest status) to 1 (highest status). The
equally-weighted average rank across the six indicators is used as a
composite index of neighbourhood status in 2001 and 2011; it is a
simple task to compute the change in status between the two time
points.
Income poverty estimates are taken from the income domain of
the English Indices of Deprivation 2004 and 2015 (Smith et al., 2015)
with reference points of August 2001 and August 2012, respectively.
Tenure and occupational class (National Statistics Socio-economic
Classification) are derived from the 2001 and 2011 Censuses. The
lowest occupational classes include routine and manual occupations;
the highest occupational classes include higher managerial, adminis-
trative, and professional occupations. The median house price within
each LSOA was calculated for 2000–2002 and 2010–2012 usingrecord-level ‘‘price paid’’ data published by the UK Land Registry and
the National Statistics Postcode Lookup file. Some of these mea-
sures were changed between the two time points: The state cash
benefits upon which the Indices of Deprivation income domain isbased changed over time; the Standard Occupational Classification
that forms the basis of National Statistics Socio-economic Classifi-
cation also changed. Computing changes in rank rather than change
in an absolute measure means that the status index is more robust
t oc h a n g e si nt h e s eu n d e r l y i n gm e a s u r e s ,a sw e l la se n a b l i n ga n
assessment of status with reference to other local neighbourhoods.
This approach provides an indicator of neighbourhood rank within
the local housing market area in 2001 and 2011, and consequently
the change in rank over that period. Finally, the question arises of
how to identify gentrifying areas from these measures. Our definition
demands that gentrifying areas should have initially been ‘‘low status,’’
and that they should be increasing their status. From an empirical
point of view, there are trade-offs to be made in the choice of cutoff
points for defining low status and ‘‘increased status.’’ To identify the
largest possible differences between areas, we may wish to focus onthe lowest status areas that have increased their status by a large
amount. This may be counterproductive, as it may result in a very
small sample size, which is unable to robustly establish differences
between area types. On the other hand, focusing on higher status
areas that have increased their status by a smaller amount may reduce
the difference between area types, making any such difference harder
to detect in the sample. There is a trade-off between maximising the
likely difference by focusing on a small population and keeping the
population large enough to minimise the uncertainty in the estimates.
To illustrate the main results, gentrifying areas are identified as
those that were in the bottom 40% of neighbourhood ranks in 2001,
and of these areas, were among the 10% of areas that had increased
their rank the most between 2001 and 2011. In Section 4, a number
of different cutoff points are utilised to explore the sensitivity of the
findings to different definitions of gentrifying.
3.2 Selecting comparison nongentrifying areas
Having described a method for selecting gentrifying areas, it is neces-
sary to select nongentrifying areas to compare mobility patterns and
poverty dynamics between them. One approach is to use all areas
that began as lower status neighbourhoods but did not increase rank
over time. The difficulty is that there is considerable heterogeneity
within this large group of lower status neighbourhoods, making the
comparison with gentrifying areas less meaningful. Rather, our com-
parison group should ideally consist of those areas that appear similarto gentrifying neighbourhoods, the only difference being their history
of status change.
This paper uses a matching algorithm to select a comparison group
of nongentrifying neighbourhoods, implemented by the R package
MatchIt (Ho, Imai, King, & Stuart, 2007). Matching is often used in
quasi-experimental designs to select a ‘‘control’’ group of subjects to
compare to some ‘‘treatment’’ group, aiming to achieve ‘‘covariate
balance,’’ that is, similarity in the observed covariates that may be
related to the outcome of interest. There are a number of differ-ent approaches to achieving covariate balance (Morgan & Winship,
2014), but a ‘‘nearest neighbour’’ approach (not to be confused
with geographical nearest neighbour) is used in this study having
been compared with alternative approaches available in MatchIt. This
involves calculating a ‘‘propensity score’’ for each LSOA, which is the
FRANSHAM 5o f1 3
probability of the LSOA being included in the group of gentrifying
neighbourhoods. The propensity score is calculated from a logistic
regression model with gentrification status as the dependent vari-
able and the observed characteristics (the six neighbourhood status
variables plus age structure and TTWA) as predictors. These predic-
tors are all measured in 2011, thus identifying a comparison groupof neighbourhoods that, in 2011, were identical to gentrifying neigh-
bourhoods with respect to these observed characteristics. The nearest
neighbour algorithm selects the
nnongentrifying LSOAs that have the
closest propensity score to each gentrifying LSOA. The value of n
was set to achieve a total sample of approximately 20% of all LSOAsin England; consequently, it varies with different values of the cutoff
points described above.
Covariate balance is assessed by comparing the means of each
covariate, conducting ttests and calculating the ‘‘standardised bias.’’
For each covariate, the standardised bias is calculated as the difference
in means between the gentrifying and comparison areas, divided by the
pooled standard deviation (Eggers & Hainmueller, 2009). The average
standardised bias is the mean across all covariates. These measures
are compared before and after matching, to examine the degree to
which the matching algorithm improves covariate balance.
3.3 Measuring residential mobility and poverty
dynamics
Residential moves and changes in poverty status are observed via
longitudinal household microdata sourced from the UK Household
Longitudinal Study (UKHLS), also known as Understanding Society
(University of Essex Institute of Economic and Social Research &
NatCen Social Research and Kantar Public, 2016). UKHLS consists of a
stratified and clustered random sample of 40,000 U.K. households that
began in 2009 (Knies, 2016). Initial respondents to UKHLS have beenshown to be geographically representative of the national population
in terms of neighbourhood deprivation and demographics (Petersen &
Rabe, 2013 , 2013). The LSOA of residence for each UKHLS household
at each interview was accessed on Special Licence conditions from
the UK Data Archive.
This study utilises data from households in England at Waves 2 to
5 of UKHLS. The interviews in each wave of UKHLS are conducted
over 2 years, so Wave 2 includes interviews conducted in 2010–2011
and Wave 5 covers interviews in 2013–2014. Data from Wave 1are excluded for two reasons: first, the time point of interviews
(2009–2010) is before neighbourhood gentrification is observed to
have been taking place (2011). Second, other studies (DWP, 2017b:
19) have discarded poverty transitions between the first two waves
due to an artefactual rise in self-reported income between the first
and second UKHLS interviews. This is postulated to be a result of
‘‘dependent interviewing’’ (where respondents are reminded of a previ-
ous answer) and reduced concerns about sharing sensitive information
(Fisher, 2019). Data from Waves 6 and 7 of UKHLS are currentlyavailable, but these were excluded to keep the observation window
(2010–2014) close to the time when gentrification was observed to
have taken place (2011).
Poverty is defined here in relative terms as the ‘‘inability to par-
ticipate [in society] owing to a lack of resources’’ (Nolan & Whelan,1996: 188) and operationalised by means of a relative income poverty
measure. An individual is classified as being in income poverty if
the net equivalised income of their household is below 60% of
the median household income, the commonly used definition of the
income poverty line (DWP, 2017a). Net income is income from all
sources including government transfers, net of direct taxes (variable
w_hhnetinc3 in UKHLS) and before housing costs. Household income
is equivalised according to the modified OECD scale to account for thehigher income required by larger households to secure adequate living
standards. Household incomes are calculated in January 2015 prices
using a price deflator provided by the Office for National Statistics.
Only individuals with positive longitudinal weights at Wave 5 are
included in the study, that is, people who provided a survey response
at each of the first five waves. The weights are used to adjust the
estimates for panel attrition and differential sampling probabilities.
People aged 66 years and over were excluded from the sample on the
basis that people of pensionable age have rather different patterns ofresidential mobility and income dynamics from people in working-age
households.
3.4 Observing processes in gentrifying
and nongentrifying areas
Having acquired the data described above, it is a simple task to iden-
tify when individuals move LSOA between waves or when they enter
or exit poverty. The question is how to use this data to describe
the processes operating in the gentrifying and matched comparison
areas? One approach to this (utilised by; Freeman et al., 2016) is to
analyse the data at the level of individuals, describing the association
(or more ambitiously, the causal relation) between residential mobility
rates and gentrification, using regression models to control for individ-
ual characteristics. If we are interested in neighbourhood processes,we do not wish to control for individual characteristics—we wish to
understand who is moving in and out of areas, leaving in any com-
positional effects, to understand what processes may be causing the
neighbourhood composition to change.
This paper uses a variety of methods to interrogate the data. First,
residential moves and poverty transitions are analysed at an aggregate
level. UKHLS respondents living in gentrifying LSOAs are treated as
being representative of the population living in such LSOAs (after using
sample weights); respondents living in matched comparison areas aresimilarly treated as being representative of the population living in
those neighbourhoods. Outward mobility is estimated by selecting all
those living in gentrifying or matched comparison areas in year
t=0,
and calculating the proportion who had moved out of the area by
year t=1. Estimates are broken down by area type and poverty sta-
tus at t=0to enable comparisons. Inward mobility is estimated by
selecting all those living in gentrifying or matched comparison areas
in year t=1and calculating the proportion who had moved in to the
area in the year before. Poverty entrance and exit is calculated in ananalogous fashion, using the UKHLS sample living in gentrifying or
matched comparison areas in year
t=0and comparing their poverty
status 1 year later. Second, this aggregate analysis is complemented
by logistic regression models that include additional individual char-
acteristics that are related to residential mobility propensities (albeit
6o f1 3 FRANSHAM
these should be accounted for by the matching process). The logistic
regression analysis is then broken down by TTWA type to investigate
geographic patterns. The four types used are London, large urban areas
(Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Bradford, Liverpool, Manchester, New-
castle, Nottingham, Leicester, and Sheffield), London hinterland (areas
surrounding London in south-east England), and small urban/rural
areas. Finally, there is an aggregate analysis of the characteristics of
people moving in to gentrifying and nongentrifying areas: age, gender,living in a household with children, income poverty, housing tenure,
occupational class, university education, and ethnic group.
The UKHLS data were analysed using methods in the R package
survey (Lumley, 2010), which applies weights and adjusts standard
errors for clustering and stratification of the sample when estimating
statistical models and conducting statistical tests. Ninety-five percent
confidence intervals are constructed to evaluate the statistical signif-
icance of differences between groups. Mutually exclusive confidence
intervals are a conservative test of statistical significance (Schenker& Gentleman, 2001); (Lumley, 2010, p. 31) recommends an F test of
bivariate association, which is implemented in the survey package and
reported in the text. The analysis was conducted in R Version 3.4.3
(R Core Team, 2016), and the code is available at https://github.com/
mfransham/2020-02-gentrification-displacement-PSaP.
4 RESULTS
4.1 Gentrifying and nongentrifying matched areas
The first step in constructing the index of neighbourhood status in
2001 and 2011, and consequently the index of neighbourhood change,
was to rank each LSOA within its parent TTWA according to each of
the six indicators. Table 1 shows the linear correlation between these
indicators in 2011 for all 32,844 LSOAs in England. There is a verystrong correlation between the income poverty rank and the other
five indicator ranks of between 0.73 and 0.85. The lowest correlations
are between the median house price and the indicators of tenure and
occupation but still moderately strong at between 0.51 and 0.57. In
general, the indicator ranks appear to be well correlated, such that
in combination, we would expect them to be measuring the same
concept.
The mean change in the index of neighbourhood status for those
LSOAs that were in the bottom four deciles of the neighbourhoodranking in 2001 was 0.003 with a standard deviation of 0.054. There
is a right skew to the distribution (a chart is provided as supporting
information), with 106 LSOAs having large increases in rank of over 0.2.
Cutoffs at 85, 90, 95, and 97.5 centiles are used to identify gentrifying
areas in various different definitions used in the sensitivity tests
below. The base case used in the main results identifies gentrifying
areas as the 40% lowest status areas in 2011 that had the 10%
largest increase in rank between 2001 and 2011. This equates to
32,844 ×0.4×0.1=1,314gentrifying LSOAs.
Table 2 shows the results of using the Matchit nearest neighbour
algorithm to find a matched comparison group of nongentrifying
LSOAs. Each gentrifying LSOA was matched with four nongentrifying
LSOAs to generate a large enough sample for subsequent analysis.
The gentrifying and matched comparison areas are compared with anunmatched comparison group, those LSOAs that were in the bottom
four deciles of neighbourhood rank in 2001 but did not increase their
rank more than the defined cutoff. The table shows the means of the
variables on which the areas were matched and pvalues from ttests
for significant differences in means between the characteristics of the
gentrifying and matched comparison areas.
The unmatched comparison group is particularly different to the
gentrifying areas on some characteristics: higher poverty rates, a lower
proportion of people in professional occupations, a higher proportion
in routine occupations, lower house prices, and a lower proportion
of people aged 16 to 44 years. The matched comparison group
improves on these significantly, with very small differences remaining
on all variables. Most of the ttests show non-significant differences
between the gentrifying and matched comparison areas. The ttests
for the neighbourhood rank in 2011 and proportion of people aged 0to 15 years do indicate statistically significant differences, though the
differences in means are very small at 0.01% and 0.4%, respectively.
Whether these statistically significant differences are of practical
significance to the results is discussed later. The average standardised
bias is 0.36 in the unmatched sample and 0.03 in the matched sample
(a full plot is provided as supporting information).
4.2 Residential mobility rates
Figure 1 shows the average annual proportion of people who moved
out of and into the matched sample of LSOAs between 2010 and
2014, by area type (gentrifying / nongentrifying) and poverty status
in the previous year (income poor / not income poor). There was
a higher rate of outward mobility among income-poor individuals
compared with not income-poor individuals. There was no difference
between areas; income poor individuals were no more likely to move
out of gentrifying than nongentrifying areas. Similarly, there was nodifference for not income-poor individuals.
Some differences are evident in inward mobility. Income poor peo-
ple were less likely to move into gentrifying LSOAs than nongentrifying
comparison areas, and not income-poor people were more likely to
move into gentrifying LSOAs than matched comparison areas.
Ftests
of association indicate that the association between in-mobility and
gentrification for income-poor individuals is not statistically signifi-
cant at the 95% level ( F(1|292)=3.01,p=.084). The association
between in-mobility and gentrification for not income-poor individu-als is statistically significant
(F(1|782)=4.08,p=0.044);n o ti n c o m e
poor individuals have a higher in-mobility rate to gentrifying areas
compared with the matched comparison areas.
This simple analysis is extended in Table 3, which shows the results
from logistic regression models of the propensity to move in to a
neighbourhood. The first model, which recovers the same estimates
presented in Figure 1, is a parsimonious model that includes area
type (gentrifying / nongentrifying), income poverty status and the
interaction term between the two. This interaction term indicateswhether moves in to a gentrifying area are associated with income
poverty status. As can be seen in the table, this interaction term
is negative and statistically significant at the 95% confidence level,
indicating that there is such an association (confirming expectations
from the
Ftests above).
FRANSHAM 7o f1 3
Neighbourhood status Poverty Professional Routine House prices Owner occupied Social rent
Poverty 1.00
Professional 0.78 1.00
Routine 0.85 0.90 1.00
House prices 0.73 0.79 0.82 1.00
Owner occupied 0.80 0.56 0.57 0.55 1.00
Social rent 0.83 0.62 0.66 0.51 0.83 1T ABLE 1 Linear correlation
between six neighbourhoodstatus indicators measured in
2011, all Lower Super Output
Areas in England
Variable Gentrifying area Matched comparison Unmatched comparison ttests
Poverty 20.8 21.2 24.7 0.21
Professional occupations 25.0 24.6 19.3 0.24
Routine occupations 43.0 43.8 51.3 0.05
House prices 181,000 182,100 136,300 0.75
Owner occupation 45.4 45.6 47.0 0.78
Social rented 30.4 30.7 33.3 0.65
Neighbourhood rank 0.34 0.33 0.21 0.01
Aged 0–15 20.1 20.5 21.2 0.03
Aged 16–24 14.5 14.3 12.9 0.31
Aged 25–44 33.0 32.6 28.8 0.2T ABLE 2 Means of matching
characteristics in 2011 for gentrifyingareas, matched comparison areas,
and unmatched comparison areas
The second model in Table 3 extends the first model by adding
characteristics that are known to be associated with residential mobil-
ity propensity. The process of matching neighbourhood compositionshould have already ensured that the populations in gentrifying and
nongentrifying areas are similar with respect to these characteristics,
but this analysis offers an additional check. As expected, it shows that
age, the presence of children, and housing tenure are significant predic-
tors of propensity to move, but the interaction term between poverty
status and gentrification remains statistically significant, reassurance
that the matching process has done its job.
The third model explores the relationship between area gentrifi-
cation, income poverty, moves, and housing tenure, by introducing athree-way interaction term. None of the three-way interaction terms
are statistically significant. This means that there is little evidence
to support the proposition that propensity to move in to gentrify-
ing areas is associated with housing tenure type, over and above the
other characteristics already included in the model. The interaction
term between income poverty and area gentrification remains statis-
tically significant in this third model. A notable feature of these threemodels is that area gentrification is a significant predictor of moves in
to an area. This suggests that gentrifying areas are more likely to have
had moves in to the area than nongentrifying areas. A fourth model
was also run (not shown for brevity) that included interaction terms
between income poverty, area gentrification, and ethnic group; theinteraction terms in this model were not significant, suggesting littleevidence of a stratification of patterns by ethnic group.
These same three models were run for the propensity to move out
of areas. The results (provided as supporting information) show that
there is no association between income poverty and area gentrificationfor moves out of areas in any of the model specifications.
To investigate whether there are any specific geographic patterns
within this aggregate picture, Table 4 shows the simple model specifi-
cation broken down by TTWA type. For three of the four TTWA types,the interaction term is a similar size or larger than in the aggregate
model presented in Table 3. However, because of reduced sample
size, the standard error of these estimates is approximately doubled,with the result that only one of the interaction terms (for the ‘‘large
urban’’ TTWA type) is statistically significant at the 95% level. A table
of results for models of outward moves by TTWA type (provided
as supporting information) shows the same conclusion as the aggre-
gate models, that there is no association in any of the TTWA typesbetween income poverty and area gentrification for moves out of
areas.
Figure 2 shows estimates of the characteristics of the population
observed to move in to gentrifying and nongentrifying areas. It shows
that there are statistically significant differences by income poverty,
occupational class and degree-level qualifications in the population
who move in, by area type. A total of 14.7% (9.3–20.0) of people
who moved in to gentrifying areas lived in households with incomes
below the poverty line, compared with 23.1% (18.9–27.3) of peoplewho moved in to nongentrifying areas. A total of 51.2% (41.0–61.5) of
people who moved to gentrifying areas were in the professional occu-
pational class compared with 41.9% (36.9–46.9) of people who moved
to nongentrifying areas; for people in the routine occupational class,
these figures were 23.5% (15.1–31.9) and 30.1% (25.4–34.9), respec-
tively. People moving in to gentrifying areas were also more likely to
be a university graduate, 41.9% (31.9–51.9) of inward movers had a
degree, compared with 28.4% (24.0–32.9) of people who moved to
nongentrifying areas. There are no statistically significant differencesbetween the two populations in age, sex, living in a household with
children, housing tenure, or ethnic group (collapsed here into White
British and other for reasons of sample size).
Conversely, there are no statistically significant differences in the
characteristics of the populations observed to move out of gentri-
fying and nongentrifying areas. A similar chart to Figure 2 for the
characteristics of outmovers is provided as supporting information.
4.3 Sensitivity analysis: Residential mobility rates
To investigate the sensitivity of these results to the definition of ‘‘gen-
trifying area,’’ Figure 3 shows how the coefficient on the interaction
term between income poverty and gentrification status varies accord-
8o f1 3 FRANSHAM
FIGURE 1 One-year mobility rates into and out
of gentrifying and matched comparison areas, bypoverty status in previous year. LSOA, LowerSuper Output Areas
T ABLE 3 Logistic regression models of propensity to
have moved to the neighbourhoodVariable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
(Intercept) −2.42***−1.66***−1.65***
(0.06) (0.13) (0.13)
Gentrifying area .26*.34*.34*
(0.13) (0.14) (0.14)
Income poor .12 .17 .17
(0.13) (0.13) (0.13)
Gentrifying area.income poor −.66*−.83**−1.87*
(0.26) (0.27) (0.74)
Female .14*.14*
(0.06) (0.06)
Age −.03***−.03***
(0.00) (0.00)
Children in household −1.00***−1.00***
(0.12) (0.12)
Tenure (base: owner occupied)
Social rented .04 .02
(0.13)( 0.13)
Private rented 1.74***1.72***
(0.11)( 0.11)
Tenure interactions
Gentrifying area.income poor.social rented 1.14
(0.82)
Gentrifying area.income poor.private rented 1.24
(0.80)
Deviance 13,744.77 11,984.07 11,976.36
Dispersion 1.00 1.00 1.00
Num. obs. 20,101 20,014 20,014
Note . Standard errors shown in brackets. p<.001.p<.01.p<.05.
ing to different cutoffs used to identify gentrifying LSOAs. The model
used in these estimates is the simple logistic regression model includ-
ing income poverty and gentrification status (i.e., Model 1 in Table 3),
with results from separate models of in-mobility and out-mobility
shown. The base case reported in the main results is in the middle
of the charts, labelled (0.4, 0.1): areas in the bottom four deciles in
2001 that were in the 10% of areas with the largest increase in neigh-bourhood rank. Other cutoffs are labelled similarly: For example, the
case labelled (0.3, 0.025) identifies areas in the bottom three deciles in
2001 that were in the 2.5% of areas with the largest increase in neigh-
bourhood rank. The figure plots the point estimate of the interaction
term coefficient along with a 95% confidence interval.
The out-mobility results show that there is no evidence of an
association between income poverty and area gentrification in terms
FRANSHAM 9o f1 3
Variable London Large urban London hinterland Smaller urban / rural
(Intercept) −2.48*** −2.61*** −2.17*** −2.36***
(0.13) (0.11) (0.15) (0.10)
Gentrifying area .67** .61** −.55 −.09
(0.23) (0.22) (0.37) (0.25)
Income poor .30 .18 −.01 .06
(0.27) (0.21) (0.38) (0.21)
Gentrifying area.income poor −0.48 −1.59** 0.34 −0.58
(0.44) (0.48) (0.77) (0.49)
Deviance 3,983.08 4,220.76 1,735.94 3,750.37
Dispersion 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Num. obs. 5,427 6,732 2,358 5,584
Note. Standard errors shown in brackets. p<.001.p<.01.T ABLE 4 Logistic regression models of
propensity to have moved to theneighbourhood by travel to work area
type
FIGURE 2 Characteristics of people moving in to areas
of propensity to move out of an area, regardless of the definition
of gentrification used. All of the confidence intervals around the
coefficient estimates overlap with zero, and the point estimates appear
fairly and randomly scattered about zero.
There are quite different results for in-mobility. All of the point
estimates of the interaction term coefficient are negative, and six ofthe 12 are statistically significant at the 95% level. For the broadest
definition of gentrification as areas starting in the bottom 50% of
neighbourhood ranks, none of the model interaction coefficients are
statistically significant. As the definitions focus more tightly upon
those areas with the largest changes in rank, we would expect the
coefficients to become larger, as those areas which have had the
largest increases in rank might also have had the largest difference in
mobility patterns. This is indeed what is observed, but we can see quite
clearly the trade-off in the gentrification definitions—the coefficients
become larger, but this comes at the expense of larger standard errors
as the sample size becomes smaller.
This pattern could also be an artefact of the declining efficiency
of the matching process as the gentrification definition narrows.
As the number of gentrifying LSOAs decreases, it becomes more
difficult to find sufficient close matches to gain a large enough total
sample of LSOAs. For example, the average standardised bias forthe base case matched sample is (as reported above) 0.03, but it
rises to 0.09 and 0.17 for cutoffs of the highest 5% and 2.5% of
rank rises, respectively. The increasing difference in mobility rates
could therefore be due to increased differences in the underlying
characteristics of the comparison group.
Sensitivity analysis of the pairwise
Ftests presented in Figure 1
is provided as supporting information; it illustrates similar patterns
though with fewer statistically significant results.
4.4 Poverty dynamics in gentrifying
neighbourhoods
Figure 4 shows the proportion of people in income poverty in year tby
area type and poverty status in year t−1, averaged over 2010–2014.
The upper set of bars shows the proportion of income-poor people
in 1 year who were still in poverty the following year. There was
no difference in 1-year poverty persistence between people whowere living in gentrifying compared with nongentrifying areas. The
lower set of bars shows the proportion of people not income-poor
in 1 year who were income-poor the following year, that is, rates
of annual poverty entry. This indicates that people who lived in
gentrifying areas were more likely to enter poverty in any given
10 of 13 FRANSHAM
FIGURE 3 Sensitivity analysis:
point estimate and confidenceinterval for
poverty
×gentrification
interaction term in logisticregression model, for differentgentrification definitions
FIGURE 4 One-year poverty dynamics in gentrifying and matched
comparison areas
year (0.142, confidence interval [0.119, 0.165]) than people living in
nongentrifying areas (0.105, confidence interval [0.094, 0.116]). An
Ftest of association shows that this is highly statistically significant
(F(1|786)=9.45,p=.002).
Figure 5 shows how these findings are affected by changes to the
cutoffs used to define gentrification, the analogous analysis to that
undertaken for residential mobility rates. The findings with respect to
poverty persistence are unaltered; none of the differences in poverty
persistence between gentrifying and matched comparison areas are
statistically significant. The story is different for poverty entry; of
the 5%/10%/15% definitions, seven of nine estimates are statisticallysignificant. The
pvalues for estimates where gentrification is defined
by the 2.5% of areas with the largest change in rank are very large,
which may be due to the small sample sizes involved. There appears
to be some evidence of higher poverty entry rates in gentrifying areas,
but this conclusion is sensitive to the choice of gentrifying areas.5 DISCUSSION
Using a variety of definitions, this paper identifies a set of neighbour-hoods that between 2001 and 2011 had increased their rank in the
local neighbourhood hierarchy (gentrified) and compares these neigh-
bourhoods to areas that were similar in 2011 but had not changed in
status over this time. Using data from the UKHLS and the observation
that many gentrifying areas have declining rates of income poverty, it
compares demographic processes in these two sets of areas with the
aim of establishing what it is in these areas that causes poverty rates inone to decline and in the other to remain relatively stable. This could
be caused by a higher rate of mobility of poor individuals out of these
areas (direct displacement), a lower rate of in-mobility of poor individ-
uals into these areas (exclusionary displacement), or a higher rate of
in situ poverty exit. Each of these three processes are systematically
examined.
This paper finds that, of these possible processes, there is strongest
evidence for a difference in the composition of incomers to an area
as the driver of neighbourhood change. Logistic regression modelsof the propensity to move out of an area contingent on poverty
status and area gentrification consistently show that there is no
evidence of increased outward mobility of income-poor individuals
from gentrifying compared with nongentrifying areas. This finding is
robust to different specifications of the models and different def-
initions of gentrification. Conversely, logistic regression models of
the propensity to move in show that there is good evidence fora relationship between inward mobility, poverty status, and area
gentrification. This finding is somewhat sensitive to the choice of
cutoffs used to categorise gentrifying areas, but the findings appear
promising and strongest for the more narrowly focused definitions
of gentrification. Pairwise
Ftests that investigate whether this is
due to higher inward mobility of not income-poor people or lower
inward mobility of income-poor people are less definitive but sug-
gest that both mechanisms may be at work. This conclusion about
the role of inward mobility is strengthened by the finding that peo-
FRANSHAM 11 of 13
FIGURE 5 Poverty dynamics sensitivity analysis: point estimate and pvalue for difference in poverty entry and exit rates between gentrifying
and nongentrifying areas for different gentrification definitions
ple moving to gentrifying areas are less likely to be income poor,
more likely to have a university degree, and more likely to be in the
professional occupational class than people moving to nongentrifying
areas.
The unexpected finding of this paper is the evidence that poverty
entry rates may be higher in gentrifying than nongentrifying areas. This
is in the opposite direction to that theoretically expected: If an area
is climbing in neighbourhood status, and income poverty is falling, we
might expect net poverty reduction in situ (via lower rates of poverty
entry or higher rates of poverty exit) to be involved. In the base case
for analysis, areas identified as gentrifying in 2011 had an average
income poverty rate of 21%, whereas in 2001, it had been 27% (for
matched comparison areas, it was 21% and 22%). It is possible thatlabour markets in and near gentrifying areas have greater insecurity,
consequently leading to greater rates of poverty entry, or that the
residents who remain during the process of gentrification are morevulnerable to poverty entry than those in comparable nongentrifying
areas.
One of the limitations of this study is that it assumes that the pro-
cesses that occurred in gentrifying areas between 2001 and 2011 were
still occurring in the observation window 2010–2014. It is possiblethat direct displacement had taken place earlier in the gentrification
process and therefore was unobserved by this study. In addition, the
results presented here are an average over all processes in all gentri-fying areas; it is likely that such processes are heterogenous, leaving
open the possibility that although the dominant average process is
exclusionary displacement, direct displacement does occur in someplaces at some times. Similarly, this paper examines a particular win-
dow of time, a historically atypical period of post-recession stagnation
in household incomes following the global financial crisis; the findings
could plausibly be different in other periods. Replicating the methodin this paper using data from the British Household Panel Survey from
1991 to 2008 may be able to illuminate this question.
This paper makes a number of methodological contributions includ-
ing the application of the UKHLS to the study of gentrificationprocesses and the use of matching methods to compare processes
between areas. One question to ask is whether sample attrition from
the UKHLS—the progressive loss of the sample over time—is likelyto bias the findings of this paper, particularly given that sample attri-
tion can be associated with moving home. This bias would occur if
income-poor people moving into gentrifying areas were more likely
to leave the UKHLS sample than people moving in to nongentrify-
ing areas (controlling for demographic observables related to attrition)
and if not income-poor people moving into gentrifying areas were less
likely to leave the UKHLS sample than people moving into nongentri-
fying areas. It is difficult to imagine plausible scenarios as to why these
patterns would explain the tentative findings described above.
Another question to ask is whether the imperfect matching of areas
could influence the results. In the base case presented above, two of
thettests for difference in means were statistically significant, though
in practical terms, the differences were very small—the matched
comparison group had 0.01 lower mean neighbourhood rank in 2011
and 0.4 percentage points higher mean proportion of 0 to 15 year olds.Poverty entry rates are higher in higher poverty areas, so if anything
this may have slightly reduced the difference between gentrifying and
nongentrifying areas rather than increased it. A higher proportion of
0 to 15 years olds (and consequently a lowerproportion of over45 year
olds) would suggest a slightly higher rate of mobility in nongentrifying
areas, though we would expect this difference in both inward andoutward mobility—the fact that differences are only evident in one of
these flows suggests that the impact of slightly different age structures
is relatively small.
12 of 13 FRANSHAM
An ancillary finding from the logistic regression analyses is that
area gentrification is a significant predictor of moves into an area
over this period. This suggests that there may have been a higher
overall rate of inward movement into gentrifying compared with
nongentrifying areas and points to the role of processes of ‘‘dilution’’
that are taking place alongside exclusionary displacement. As reportedby Rae (2013), the residential areas of large cities have seen significant
population growth in the past two decades. Compositional change is
in part taking place due to a rise in the total population, where the
incoming population is different in characteristics to the established
population, thus ‘‘diluting’’ its characteristics. One such example is
so-called ‘‘new-build gentrification’’ (Davidson & Lees, 2010). This kind
of population dilution may also be involved in othersocio-demographic
shifts such as change in ethnic group composition.
6 CONCLUSION
To summarise the findings on residential mobility patterns using adifferent methodology, a different data set, and a different time period,
this study replicates the result of Freeman et al. (2016) that there is
no evidence of direct displacement of low-income individuals from
gentrifying areas. In answer to the puzzle of what, then, is driving theprocess of neighbourhood change, the analysis presented above finds
good evidence that it is a change in the composition of incomers to an
area that is the strongest driver or what might be termed exclusionary
displacement.
An obvious question is how this finding relates to numerous
small-scale qualitative studies that do find evidence of direct displace-
ment of existing residents through, for example, the demolition of
social housing such as the Heygate Estate in London (Lees, 2014). Do
the findings outlined in this systematic analysis of gentrification in Eng-land invalidate the findings of qualitative case studies; or vice-versa,
do the qualitative studies cast doubt on the conclusions drawn here?
In the absence of the detailed data required to conduct quantitative
case studies, these two types of studies should be viewed as comple-
mentary rather than in opposition. Although there is strong evidence
that exclusionary displacement is the dominant process in gentrifica-
tion, it cannot be asserted that it is the only one—there is clear case
study evidence of housing injustice faced by some existing residents
in processes of gentrification. That said, the assertion that neighbour-hood gentrification necessarily involves the direct displacement of
existing residents cannot be unquestioningly supported.
It is often asserted in policy and media discussion that direct
displacement—the involuntary displacement of people from their
homes—is the most egregious aspect of gentrification (Slater, 2009).
Even if gentrification typically proceeds via exclusionary rather than
direct displacement, or via processes of dilution, there are still negative
welfare impacts that should concern us. Exclusionary displacement
m a yh a v ea ni m p a c to np e o p l ew h oi nt h ea b s e n c eo fg e n t r i f i c a t i o nm a yhave moved to gentrifying areas and upon those long-term residents
who remain. This study leaves open the question of where people who
are not moving to gentrifying areas are moving to instead. It may be
that these people are displaced to areas that are further from labour
market opportunities and/or have poorer services and amenities. Forlong-term residents who remain, it is likely that neighbourhood change
reduces some sources of social welfare but creates others. There may
be some positive impacts via an increase in ‘‘middle-class voice’’ and
reduced territorial stigmatisation. On the other hand, it may lead to
services and facilities being targeted at higher income individuals, lead-
ing to a decline in the facilities for people living on lower incomes andan erosion of the support derived from social networks of people in
similar situations. Urban and housing policy has a large role to play in
mediating these welfare impacts by intervening in the housing market
to increase the availability of secure and decent housing.
ORCID
Mark Fransham
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9284-2517
REFERENCES
Atkinson, R. (2000). Measuring gentrification and displacement in greater
London. Urban Studies ,37(1), 149–165. https://doi.org/10.1080/
0042098002339
Atkinson, R., & Bridge, G (2005). The new urban colonialism. In R. Atkinson,
&G .B r i d g e( E d s . ) , Gentrification in a global context: The new urban
colonialism . New York: Routledge, pp. 1–17. https://doi.org/10.4324/
9780203392089
Bailey, N., & Livingston, M. (2007). Population turnover and area deprivation .
York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
Bailey, N., & Minton, J. (2018). The suburbanisation of poverty in British
cities, 2004-16: Extent, processes and nature. Urban Geography ,39(6),
892–915. https://doi.org/10.1080/02723638.2017.1405689
Clark, WAV., & Rivers, N (2013). Community choice in large cities: Selec-
tivity and ethnic sorting across neighbourhoods. In M. van. Ham,D. Manley, & N. Bailey (Eds.), Understanding neighbourhood dynamics:
New insights for neighbourhood effects research . London: Springer, pp.
255–280. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-4854-5_12
Davidson, M., & Lees, L. (2010). New-build gentrification: Its histories,
trajectories, and critical geographies. Population, Space and Place ,16(5),
395–411. https://doi.org/10.1002/psp.584
Dorling, D. (2014). All that is solid: The great housing disaster . London: Allen
Lane.
DWP (2017a). Households below average income: An analysis of the UK
income distribution 1994/95-2015/16 . London: Department for Work
& Pensions.
DWP (2017b). Income dynamics: Background and methodology .L o n d o n :
Department for Work & Pensions.
Eggers, A. C., & Hainmueller, J. (2009). MPs for sale? Returns to office in
postwar British politics. The American Political Science Review ,103(4),
513–533. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0003055409990190
Ellen, I. G., & Regan, K. M. O. (2011). How low income neighborhoods
change: Entry, exit, and enhancement. Regional Science and Urban Eco-
nomics ,41(2), 89–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2010.12.
005
Fenton, A. (2016). Gentrification in London: A progress report, 2001–2013.
CASEpapers, London: London School of Economics.
Fielding, T. (2012). Migration in Britain: Paradoxes of the present, prospects
for the future . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Fisher, P. (2019). Does repeated measurement improve income data qual-
ity?Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics ,81(5), 989–1011. https://
doi.org/10.1111/obes.12296Wiley.
Freeman, L. (2005). Displacement or succession? Residential mobility
in gentrifying neighborhoods. Urban Affairs Review ,40(4), 463–491.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1078087404273341
FRANSHAM 13 of 13
Freeman, L., Cassola, A., & Cai, T. (2016). Displacement and gentrification
in England and Wales: A quasi-experimental approach. Urban Studies ,
53(13), 2797–2814. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098015598120
Glass, R. (1964). Introduction: Aspects of change. in: Centre for Urban
Studies (ed.)London: Aspects of change, London: MacKibbon & Kee.
Ham, M. v., Manley, D., Bailey, N., & Maclennan, D. (2013). Understand-
ing neighbourhood dynamics. In M. v. Ham, D. Manley, N. Bailey,
& D. Maclennan (Eds.), Understanding neighbourhood dynamics: New
insights for neighbourhood effects research . Dordrecht: Springer, pp.
1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-4854-5
Hamnett, C. (2003). Gentrification and the middle-class remaking of inner
London, 1961-2001. Urban Studies ,40(12), 2401–2426. https://doi.
org/10.1080/0042098032000136138
Hamnett, C. (2010). Moving the poor out of central London? The impli-
cations of the coalition government 2010 cuts to Housing Benefits.
Environment and Planning A ,42(12), 2809–2819. https://doi.org/10.
1068/a43511
Hills, J., De Agostini, P., & Sutherland, H. (2016). Benefits, pensions, tax
credits and direct taxes. In R. Lupton, T. Burchardt, J. Hills, & et al
(Eds.), Social policy in a cold climate: Policies and their consequences since
the Crisis . Bristol: Policy Press, pp. 11–34. https://doi.org/10.1332/
policypress/9781447327714.003.0002
Ho, D., Imai, K., King, G., & Stuart, E. A. (2007). Matching as nonparametric
preprocessing for reducing model dependence in parametric causal
inference. Political Analysis ,15(3), 199–236. https://doi.org/10.1093/
pan/mpl013
Hochstenbach, C. (2016). State-led gentrification and the changing geog-
raphy of market-oriented housing policies. Housing, Theory and Society ,
34(4), 399–419. https://doi.org/10.1080/14036096.2016.1271825
Hochstenbach, C., & Van Gent, W. P. C. (2015). An anatomy of gen-
trification processes: Variegating causes of neighbourhood change.
Environment and Planning A ,47(7), 1480–1501. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0308518X15595771
Hood, A., & Waters, T. (2017). Living standards, poverty and inequality in the
UK: 2016-17 to 2021-22 . London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Knies, G. (2016). Understanding society—UK Household Longitudinal
Study: Waves 1-6 User Guide. Colchester: University of Essex. (ed.)
Lees, L. (2014). The Urban injustices of new labour's ‘New Urban Renewal’:
T h ec a s eo ft h eA y l e s b u r yE s t a t ei nL o n d o n . Antipode ,46(4), 921–947.
https://doi.org/10.1111/anti.12020
Lees, L., & Ferreri, M. (2016). Resisting gentrification on its final frontiers:
Learning from the Heygate Estate in London (1974 – 2013). Cities ,57,
14–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2015.12.005
Lees, L., Slater, T., & Wyly, E. (2008). Gentrification . New York: Routledge.
Lumley, T. (2010). Complex surveys: A guide to analysis using R .J o h nW i l e y :
Hoboken, New Jersey.
Marcuse, P. (1985). Gentrification, abandonment, and displacement: Con-
nections, causes, and policy responses in New York City. Journal of
Urban and Contemporary Law ,28, 195–240.
McKinnish, T., Walsh, R., & White, T. K. (2010). Who gentrifies low-income
neighborhoods? Journal of Urban Economics ,67, 180–193. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jue.2009.08.003Morgan, S., & Winship, C. (2014). Counterfactuals and causal inference: Meth-
ods and principles for social research . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107587991
Newman, K., & Wyly, E. K. (2006). The right to stay put, revisited: Gentrifi-
cation and resistance to displacement in New York City. Urban Studies ,
43(1), 23–57. https://doi.org/10.1080/00420980500388710
Nolan, B., & Whelan, C. (1996). Resources, deprivation and poverty .O x f o r d :
Oxford University Press.
Petersen, J., & Rabe, B. (2013). Understanding society—A geographical
profile of respondents. Understanding Society Working Paper, Essex:
Institute for Social & Economic Research.
R Core Team (2016). R: A language and environment for statistical com-
puting. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing, https://www.
r-project.org/
Rae, A. (2013). English urban policy and the return to the city: A decade
of growth, 2001-2011. Cities ,32, 94–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cities.2013.03.012
Schenker, N., & Gentleman, J. F. (2001). On judging the significance of
differences by examining the overlap between confidence intervals.
The American Statistician ,55(3), 182–186. https://doi.org/10.1198/
000313001317097960
Slater, T. (2009). Missing Marcuse: On gentrification and displacement. City,
13(2-3), 292–311. https://doi.org/10.1080/13604810902982250
S m i t h ,T . ,N o b l e ,M . ,N o b l e ,S . ,W r i g h t ,G . ,M c L e n n a n ,D . ,&P l u n k e t t ,
E. (2015). The English indices of deprivation 2015. ( Research Report ):
London: Department for Communities & Local Government.
Tinson, A., Ayrton, C., Barker, K., Born, T. B., Aldridge, H., & Kenway,
P. (2016). Monitoring poverty and social exclusion 2016 .Y o r k :J o s e p h
Rowntree Foundation.
University of Essex Institute of Economic and Social Research, & NatCen
Social Research and Kantar Public (2016). https://doi.org/10.5255/
UKDA-SN-6614-9, Understanding society: Waves 1-6, 2009-2015.
SN: 6614. Colchester: UK Data Archive.
Vigdor, J. L. (2002). Does gentrification harm the poor? Brookings-Wharton
Papers on Urban Affairs 2002, 133–182. https://doi.org/10.1353/urb.
2002.0012
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found online in the
Supporting Information section at the end of the article.
How to cite this article: Fransham M. Neighbour-
hood gentrification, displacement, and poverty dynamics
in post-recession England. Popul Space Place . 2020;26:e2327.
https://doi.org/10.1002/psp.2327
