Citation: Lu, S.; Rao, X.; Duan, P . The
Rural Gentriﬁcation and Its Impacts
in Traditional Villages—A Case Study
of Xixinan Village, in China.
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su141610077
Academic Editor: Teodor Rusu
Received: 30 June 2022
Accepted: 11 August 2022
Published: 15 August 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Article
The Rural Gentriﬁcation and Its Impacts in Traditional
Villages—A Case Study of Xixinan Village, in China
Song Lu *, Xiaofang Rao and Pengxiao Duan
School of Environmental and Geographical Sciences, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai 200234, China
*Correspondence: ahlusong@shnu.edu.cn
Abstract: Since the reform and opening up in 1978, China has experienced a rapid urbanization pro-
cess, with an increasing urban population. In recent years, with the improvement of the rural living
environment and the rise of the urban middle class, more and more people have moved from cities to
villages in China. The gentriﬁcation phenomenon has also emerged in rural China. This paper takes
Xixinan Village, a traditional village in China, as a case. On the basis of ﬁeld investigation, it employs
qualitative research methods and grounded theory to explore the emergence and inﬂuence of rural
gentriﬁcation in the traditional village. The ﬁnding show that: (1) the rural gentriﬁcation in Xixinan
Village was divided into two stages, namely, the setting-in stage of immigrants (2009–2014) and
the rural gentriﬁcation development stage (2015–present). (2) The impacts of rural gentriﬁcation in
Xixinan Village primarily include four aspects: population growth, landscape change, economic trans-
formation and cultural transformation. The increased population mainly includes the urban lifestyle
type of gentriﬁers, new rural construction type of gentriﬁers and returning home entrepreneurial
type of gentriﬁers. The landscape change is mainly manifested in the spatial form of villages, housing
landscape, street landscape and other aspects. The economic transformation is manifested in the
rapid development of rural tourism services and cultural industry in Xixinan. In addition, with the
inﬂux of the new urban middle class, new aesthetic methods and cultural vitality have emerged in
Xixinan Village. (3) The rural gentriﬁcation and its impacts in Xixinan Village can be interpreted from
three perspectives, i.e., consumption orientation, production orientation and the unique role of the
government. Furthermore, the limitations of the study are brieﬂy analyzed, and the “displacement”
problem caused by rural gentriﬁcation in China needs follow-up research in the future.
Keywords: rural gentriﬁcation; development stage; impacts; traditional village; Xixinan Village
in China
1. Introduction
In 1964, the British sociologist Glass ﬁrst proposed the concept of gentriﬁcation in
cities [ 1]. The concept was extended to rural areas in the 1990s. It was used to describe the
process of the middle class moving from cities to rural areas. It not only emphasized the
rural population structural changes but also highlighted the broader social, economic and
cultural changes involved in the process [ 2–4]. Western developed countries have generally
experienced a stage of high urbanization and anti-urbanization, and rural gentriﬁcation is
regarded as a manifestation of anti-urbanization or “amenity migration” [ 5,6]. Since the
21st century, this topic has aroused extensive discussion and lasting attention in academic
circles. It is regarded as a fruitful path in rural research and has become a hot spot and
frontier of international rural research [7].
Since the reform and opening up in 1978, China has experienced a rapid urbanization
process, and the urbanization rate of the population has increased from 17.9% in 1978 to
60.6% in 2019 [ 8]. There are many phenomena in China, such as the urban population
increasing, the rapid growth of per capita income, the improving trafﬁc conditions, im-
provement of individual travel ability, urban trafﬁc congestion and increasingly worsening
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077. https://doi.org/10.3390/su141610077 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 2 of 19
urban environment. Urban residents’ environmental awareness and consciousness of life
and health are rising, coupled with the rediscovery of traditional vernacular landscapes,
especially since the 21st century. Thus, urban residents are increasingly motivated to prefer
rural life, and more and more want to move from cities to the countryside [ 9,10]. This
phenomenon is evident in the developed villages along the east coast of China, which
has brought profound impacts on the economy, society and culture of the villages. The
phenomenon of rural gentriﬁcation has also emerged in rural China.
The research on rural gentriﬁcation in China started relatively late and only yielded
sporadic results, mainly concentrated in the urban villages in Guangzhou, Beijing, Xiamen
and other places in the ‘urban villages’ in the eastern suburbs of large cities [ 6,11–13]. Tan
also conducted a diachronic ﬁeld survey on the phenomenon of rural gentriﬁcation in the
Panyang River Basin of Bama County, Guangxi Province, a popular place for longevity and
health preservation in China [ 14]. On the whole, the phenomenon of rural gentriﬁcation
has emerged in some developed rural areas in China, and related research is still in its
infancy. Both the number and the selection of rural case types of existing research are
very limited. Accordingly, this paper takes Xixinan Village, a typical traditional village
in eastern China, as an example. It employs qualitative research methods such as non-
participatory observation, interview and event analysis, to analyze the impacts of rural
gentriﬁcation in Xixinan Village. The main research problems of this paper are as follows:
(1) the composition of gentriﬁers and development stages of rural gentriﬁcation in Xixinan
Village. (2) The impacts of rural gentriﬁcation on Xixinan Village. (3) The theoretical
explanation of the gentriﬁcation of Xixinan Village is discussed.
2. Literature Review
British scholar Parsons ﬁrst observed the phenomenon of rural gentriﬁcation in a study
about British residents’ classes in rural areas. The rural gentriﬁcation mainly refers to the
urban middle class migrating to rural settlements, for living and recreational space, thus
causing the change in the rural social class structure, and leading to the shortage of rural
housing and the relocation of indigenous people [ 15]. Gentriﬁcation is a gradual process
mainly initiated and maintained by immigrants. These gentriﬁers may be urban middle-
and upper-class residents with rich capital, such as retirees and “urban elites” (national
economic elites and cultural elites), who pursue rural pastoral life in order to “escape” from
the city [ 16,17]. They may be artists looking for cheap accommodation near the countryside
and are described as well-educated low-income people [ 6,11]. The motivations of these
migrants in rural areas are different from those in urban centers, where, for example, the
middle class is attracted by employment and undervalued housing, whereas rural migrants
are attracted by speciﬁc rural amenities, especially those related to the natural environment.
Parsons and other British scholars have shown that the “gentry” in rural gentriﬁcation is
not limited to some speciﬁc middle-class people with high economic level and social class,
and economic level and class composition are not the only criteria to identify the gentry
group in rural areas. Diversiﬁed social groups with different purposes are likely to become
the subjects of rural gentriﬁcation. As long as the cultural capital and economic levels of
immigrants are higher than that of local residents, rural gentriﬁcation may occur [17].
Rural gentriﬁcation is a complex process involving the migration of the urban middle
class from cities to rural areas [ 18]. It has brought about four major changes: the transfor-
mation of rural class structure, the post-productive process of rural capital accumulation,
changes in rural housing structure and the motivation of rural reform [ 19]. In the study of
rural gentriﬁcation in Quebec, Guimond and Myriam also emphasized the complexity of
rural gentriﬁcation at various levels, including social population, housing and economic
impact, community and culture, material, environmental and political aspects [ 20]. David-
son and Lees point out that any form of contemporary gentriﬁcation should include: capital
dominating the restructuring of the architectural environment, a large number of high-
and middle-income newcomers, local residents’ displacement and landscape change. The
restructuring of the architectural environment means that the built environment in rural
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 3 of 19
areas is changed by the capital “reinvestment” of land owners, housing owners, investors,
developers, etc., emphasizing ecological aesthetics and environmental governance [ 21].
The structure change of the rural population is the most outstanding impact of rural gen-
triﬁcation, involving the characteristics of the population moving from the city to the
countryside. The aging of post-war baby boomers in the United States shows a strong
willingness to move to rural life. It is estimated that 2.7 million baby boomers moved from
cities to villages in the ﬁrst 10 years of the 21st century [ 16]. Landscape can most intuitively
describe the great changes in rural gentriﬁcation areas, such as the transformation of rural
areas from primary production to consumption LED landscape, the changing housing
tastes in rural areas and the rising real estate prices [ 22,23]. Displacement has always
been an important result of gentriﬁcation, including population displacement, housing
displacement and space displacement in rural areas [ 24]. In addition, rural gentriﬁcation
also means injecting new classes and social structures into the destination, not only bringing
better social capital and networks to the local community, but also triggering discussions
on rural governance issues, such as local land use planning, environmental aesthetics and
resource management [16,25].
The cause and inﬂuence of gentriﬁcation in rural areas can be interpreted from the per-
spectives of consumption and production [ 26]. From the perspective of consumption, rural
gentriﬁcation highlights the existence of a “new cultural class” in rural space consumption.
It suggests that the core of the economic form in the process of rural gentriﬁcation is an
experience economy and an aesthetic consumption. In the process it also emphasizes the
experience of rural cultural connotation and the formation of speciﬁc cultural taste. [ 17,27].
The “idyll” in rural Britain and the soothing “Rocky Mountain” lifestyle in rural western
America have attracted highly skilled urban labor, entrepreneurs and retirees [ 16,22,28].
From the perspective of production, it emphasizes the redistribution of capital and proﬁts
to interpret rural gentriﬁcation, not from the perspective of people. N. Smith put forward
the theory of the “rent gap” (the difference between the potential value of land and the
actual value of land) to explain gentriﬁcation [ 29]. With the decline of rural traditional
agricultural productivity and the weakening of agricultural policy protection, rural land-
scape, rural space and rural built environment become less attractive to capital, and the
potential value cannot be realized as actual monetary value, which objectively requires the
emergence of more diversiﬁed rural economy and investment models [ 30]. Globalization
is seen as one of the main drivers of rural gentriﬁcation because the middle and upper
classes, the main components of urban-to-rural mobility, beneﬁt from globalized capital
accumulation and appreciation of land or property values. They allocate their assets to
highly comfortable rural destinations. For example, the rural gentriﬁcation in remote and
comfortable areas in the United States reﬂects the spatial positioning of surplus capital
accumulated by high-wage urban occupations in the globalized service industry [ 31,32].
Clark believes that the two explanations are complementary [33].
3. Methods
3.1. Introduction to Xixinan Village
Xixinan Village is located in Xixinan Town, Huizhou District, Huangshan City, Anhui
Province, China. It is on the bank of Fengle River, a tributary of the upper Xin’an River. The
village was founded in the Tang Dynasty and prospered in the Ming and Qing Dynasties. It
has a history of 1200 years of civilization. With the rise of Huizhou merchants, it became the
most prosperous place in ancient Huizhou in the middle of the Ming Dynasty, and it became
the core of agricultural civilization in ancient Huizhou area. The village is a gathering place
of classical private gardens, with more than 10 buildings of the Ming Dynasty and more
than 100 houses of the Qing Dynasty, among which Laowu Dwelling and Lvrao Pavilion are
key national heritage conservation units. “Fengxi Eight Views”, “Xinan Ten Gardens” and
other heritage sites are clearly visible, and the three water conservancy cultural heritages of
Lei Dam, Long Dam and Tiao Dam are well preserved. On both sides of Fengle River, there
is the most complete “maple poplar forest” wetland park in southern Anhui. In history,
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 4 of 19
the boom period was known as “thousands of cooks and thousands of people”, and the
population reached 30,000 at its peak. Since the reform and opening up in 1978, with the
reduction in the number of rural laborers, traditional villages have shown a trend of decline
and hollowing out, and a large number of ancient dwellings have collapsed and been
abandoned. Since the beginning of the 21st century, Huangshan Municipal government
has successively implemented a series of protection plans for ancient dwellings, such as
the protection and utilization project of “One Thousand Houses in One Hundred Villages”,
and the construction of the Huizhou cultural and ecological protection experimental area.
Thus, the heritage sites of Xixinan Village have been well protected.
In the past 20 years, the external transportation in Huangshan City has been greatly
improved, which also contributes to the trafﬁc improvement of Xixinan Village and the
formation of regional advantages. In 2007, He-Huang Expressway connecting Hefei City,
the capital of Anhui Province, and Huangshan City was completed and opened to trafﬁc.
There is a crossing at Xixinan Village (only 3 km away). In 2015, Huangshan North Station
of a high-speed railway was completed and became available, and Beijing–Fuzhou high-
speed railway and Wuhan–Wenzhou high-speed railway meet here. Xixinan Village is only
1.5 km away from the station. Xixinan Village is 1.5 h away from Hangzhou and 2.5 h
away from Shanghai by high-speed rail, and it is only 22 km away from Huangshan Tunxi
International Airport. Xixinan Village is a beautiful rural “idyll”, with famous history and
culture and convenient external transportation. Thus, a lot of tourists and travelers have
been attracted here. Xixinan Village has developed rapidly. It was listed as the third batch
of traditional Chinese villages in 2014, the ﬁrst batch of characteristic towns in Huangshan
City in 2016, which Xixinan Village Creative Town was listed as, and the ﬁrst batch of
provincial-level characteristic towns in 2017. Now, the tourism industry of Xixinan Village
is developing rapidly, and its reputation is rising. It is one of the top 50 most beautiful
characteristic towns in the country and one of the most attractive tourist characteristic
town in the Yangtze River Delta. In 2019, it became one of the “National Key Villages for
Rural Tourism”.
3.2. Research Process and Data Processing
This paper mainly employs qualitative research methods, such as non-participatory ob-
servation, in-depth interview, event analysis and grounded theory. The authors conducted
three ﬁeld investigations in Xixinan Village in May, July and September 2019. We observed
the village by the participatory observation method, such as its terrain and geomorphology,
architectural distribution and landscape characteristics, industrial development status and
residents’ production and lifestyle. We also investigated its tourism industry as tourists,
such as the quality of rural recreation resources, home accommodation service and tourist
activity routes, and other in-depth observations were made. Furthermore, we visited the
tourism ofﬁce of Xixinan Village, the village committee, the Government of Xixinan Town,
the Tourism Commission of Huangshan City and other departments to collect relevant
basic information. In addition, the method of in-depth interview was used to obtain qual-
itative data. We obtained data from 60 interviews with 5 groups: A means immigrants,
with 12 newcomers interviewed (retired executives, designers running homestays, foreign
homestay operators, entrepreneurs, painters who opened art salons, etc.), B means tourists,
with 5 people interviewed, C means returned migrants, with 5 people interviewed, D
means local villagers, with 30 people in total (9 small-scale entrepreneurs, 14 ordinary
villagers and others); E means government staff, a total of 8. The interview included: the
migration motivation of new immigrants and their perception of the ancient buildings
and local culture of Xixinan Village, the interaction and communication between old and
new residents and the impact of immigrants on rural management and tourism devel-
opment. We also used Baidu News, the world’s largest Chinese news search website, to
collect relevant news text materials of Xixinan Village. Major events in the development
process of Xixinan Village were extracted based on local secondary materials and network
text materials.
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 5 of 19
By using the method of event analysis and experience analysis, the development
of rural gentriﬁcation in Xixinan Village was divided into two stages, i.e., newcomers’
setting-in stage and development stage. The ARCGIS method was used to visualize the
housing distribution of new immigrants. Based on the interview data of 60 people, the
impacts of rural gentriﬁcation in Xixnan Village were discussed. Using the grounded theory,
the concept was extracted and the spindle was encoded (Table 1). So, 13 concepts have
been reﬁned and further classiﬁed into four categories, i.e., population growth, landscape
changes, economic transformation and cultural turn.
Table 1. Examples of open coding.
Data Coding Transcript of Interview Concept Extraction
A01Like us immigrants, the architectural style of each family is different,
bringing in the outside culture, design elements. We are highly
educated people. After these people come in, it is not only a pull to
the local economy, especially to the local villagers’ ideas change.Cultural impacts, architectural
landscapes, conceptual shifts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B01It has not been overdeveloped and is largely uncommercial, with
generations of villagers quietly farming the land. Shady trees, cool
and pleasant, here you can breathe the sweet air at ease, listen to the
melodious birdsong, soothe the hot summer irritable mood.Pristine, quiet, relaxing, cozy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C01I miss the childhood in my hometown very much, or the home life is
good, very quiet, very comfortable, free, every day in the village to
take a walk, chat with pedestrians, very happy.Nostalgia, homesickness plot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D01Now there are many outsiders in the village, not much before, about
5 or 6 years ago. Most of the newcomers are engaged in tourism.
They buy or rent a house to open a homestay inn. More and more
tourists come here.More outsiders, more tourists
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E01The most obvious changes are the construction of high-speed railway
stations and roads. which not only make it easier for villagers to
travel, but more importantly, foreign capital will come here to invest.Transport improvement, investment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Results Analysis
4.1. The Development Stage of Rural Gentriﬁcation in Xixinan Village
For a long time, Xixinan Village was mainly a quiet agricultural village, and few people
visited. Since China’s reform and opening up in 1978, rural productivity has increased, and
the surplus rural labor force has increased day by day. There are many mountains, few
ﬁelds and the soil is barren. So, some of the young and middle-aged labor force go to cities
to work, and others stayed home to engage in beekeeping. To a certain extent, this has
improved the economic condition and farmers’ living standards in Xixinan Village. From
1998 to 2001, An Siyuan, an American, sponsored CNY 1.1 million and successively carried
out the comprehensive restoration of Laowu Dwelling heritage. In November 2000, the
Huizhou District Government issued policies to accelerate the development of tourism,
and began to consider the tourism investment promotion plan of Xixinan Village. In 2004,
Zhejiang University Andi Architectural Design Company was introduced to carry out the
tourism development of Xixinan Village. Due to the competition of many high-quality
ancient villages in Huangshan City, the tourism development of Xixinan Village was not
prominent. After the opening of Xixinan Village in 2007, the tourism development plan
failed and the foreign investor soon withdrew.
In the development process of Xixinan Village, there were two years of great inﬂuence,
2009 and 2015. In 2009, the Huangshan Municipal Government launched the protection
and utilization project of “One Thousand Houses in One Hundred Villages”, encouraging
social capital to participate in the protection of Hui-style ancient buildings. It brought the
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 6 of 19
ﬁrst batch of new immigrants to Xixinan Village. In 2015, Beijing Wangshan Investment
Co., Ltd., which is controlled by Yu Kongjian, a famous landscape designer from Peking
University, obtained the tourism development and management rights of Xixinan Village.
In the same year, the opening of Huangshan North Station of the high-speed railway greatly
improved the accessibility of Xixinan Village and its popularity soared. Therefore, the
gentriﬁcation of Xixinan Village can be divided into two stages: newcomers’ setting-in
stage and the development stage.
4.1.1. Newcomers’ Setting-in Stage (2009–2014)
There are 406 cultural relic protection units at all levels, and there were 13,438 ancient
buildings before 1949 in Huangshan City. These ancient buildings are scattered in mountain
areas. The government and the owners of ancient houses have not enough protection funds.
So, these cultural heritages have been seriously damaged. So, in order to protect and
utilize these heritages, the Huangshan Municipal Government launched the protection and
utilization project of “One Thousand Houses in One Hundred Villages” in 2009. It plans to
invest CNY 6 billion over the next ﬁve years to focus on the protection and utilization of
101 ancient villages and 1065 ancient dwellings. A new way was explored by combining
government guidance, market operation and social participation. It established easy-to-
operate local rules and regulations for practical issues, such as capital investment and
subsidies, relocation, transfer of property rights, land transfer and housing registration,
whilst encouraging outsiders (social funds) to participate in the protection of Huizhou’s
ancient buildings. In the context of this policy, some urban elites came to Xixinan Village to
buy local old houses as a second home, and twelve ancient dwellings were purchased in
this way. As Mr. Du, a retired Huawei executive who migrated in 2011, said:
At that time, we also responded to the call of ‘One Thousand Houses in One Hundred
Villages in Huangshan City’ to protect ancient villages and buildings. We came to
Xixinan Village and bought an ancient dwelling—Youranju, which was moved from
Yansi Town. At that time, the government wanted to build the New Fourth Army
Memorial Hall and some house needs to be demolished. To protect these ancient buildings,
I bought them and moved them to Xixinan Village (A6).
These newcomers are mainly from Shenzhen, most of them are corporate executives
or retirees and belong to the urban middle class. They are owners of Fenglecaotang,
Baoshantang, Jingruhuisuo, Youranju, Lvyinshanguan and other ancient dwellings. As the
“new villagers” of Xixinan Village, their behavioral habits and aesthetic styles have a certain
impact on the landscape reconstruction of the village. On one hand, they also expressed
their preference for Huizhou architectural elements. The door and window design and
furniture were repaired according to the protection requirements of traditional dwellings,
and the typical Huizhou architectural style was preserved. On the other hand, these urban
elites use and reshape the existing Huizhou culture and architectural symbols. On the basis
of maintaining the original ancient residential buildings, they carry out cultural innovation
and integration, making a new aesthetic creation. In addition, these immigrants are keen
on the exchange of art and culture. They have turned their home space into an art salon to
receive their relatives and friends. For example, Fenglecaotang Dwelling has been built as
an exchange activity garden for the New Ideas Chamber of Commerce, Shenzhen Chamber
of Commerce and the Association of Scientists and Entrepreneurs. At this stage, these
houses were scattered in the ancient village, alternately distributed with the local villagers’
houses. The scattered gentriﬁcation spaces were observed (Figure 1). The local villagers still
work at sunrise and sunset without interfering with the immigrants, and the village’s native
way of life, humanistic order and social governance structure can continue. Immigrants’
activities revolve around their own residences, that is, the “home” has become the main
place for the production of a gentriﬁed space.
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 7 of 19
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 20 
 
Commerce, Shenzhen Chamber of Commerce and the Association of Scientists and Entre-
preneurs. At this stage, these houses were scattered in the ancient village, alternately dis-
tributed with the local villagers’ houses. The sc attered gentrification spaces were observed 
(Figure 1). The local villagers still work at sunrise and sunset without interfering with the 
immigrants, and the village ’s native way of life, humanistic order and social governance 
structure can continue. Immig rants’ activities revolve around their own residences, that 
is, the “home” has become the main place for the production of a gentrified space.  
  
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the distribution of immigrant residences in Xixinan Village (the left 
is before 2015, and the right  is after 2015) . 
4.1.2. Rural Gentrification Development Stage (2015–Present ) 
In 2015, Beijing Wangshan Investmen t Co., L td., which is j ointly owned by Professor 
Yu Kongjian, a famous landscape design er from Peking University, signed an agreement 
with the People’s Government  of Huizhou District to obtain the 40 -year tourism manage-
ment right of Xixinan  Village for the comprehensive tourism development of the ancient 
village.  The project formally established a long -term cooperative relationship with the 
Xixinan Township Government and villagers through a contract, who formed a commu-
nity of interests and established a mechanism for the joint m anagement of h eritage vil-
lages [15]. In the context of China entering the era of high -speed rail , Huangshan North  
Station of the high -speed railway , construct ed in 2015, become an important hub of 
Huangshan City external  transportation . Plus , with the opening of Hefei –Huangshan Ex-
pressway in 2007 , Xixinan  Village suddenly became the most convenien t traditional vil-
lage, which entered the view of many tourists, and became more and more popular. In 
2016, the state proposed the construction plan of characte ristic towns  all over the country . 
Xixinan Village  has unique advantages , such as  convenient traffic conditions , beautiful 
natural environment, profound cultural heritage and foreign entrepreneurs . Thus , Xix-
inan  Town was successfully added to the list of the first characteristic towns of Huangshan 
City  in 2016 . The local government has formulated the development plan of Xixinan Vil-
lage and determined the construction target of a compound town driven by “tourism and 
creative industry ”. The local government began to build the “Xixinan Creative Town ”, 
attracting nearly CNY 200 million of social funds. Many new business forms have 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the distribution of immigrant residences in Xixinan Village (the left
is before 2015, and the right is after 2015).
4.1.2. Rural Gentriﬁcation Development Stage (2015–Present)
In 2015, Beijing Wangshan Investment Co., Ltd., which is jointly owned by Professor Yu
Kongjian, a famous landscape designer from Peking University, signed an agreement with
the People’s Government of Huizhou District to obtain the 40-year tourism management
right of Xixinan Village for the comprehensive tourism development of the ancient village.
The project formally established a long-term cooperative relationship with the Xixinan
Township Government and villagers through a contract, who formed a community of
interests and established a mechanism for the joint management of heritage villages [ 15].
In the context of China entering the era of high-speed rail, Huangshan North Station of
the high-speed railway, constructed in 2015, become an important hub of Huangshan City
external transportation. Plus, with the opening of Hefei–Huangshan Expressway in 2007,
Xixinan Village suddenly became the most convenient traditional village, which entered the
view of many tourists, and became more and more popular. In 2016, the state proposed the
construction plan of characteristic towns all over the country. Xixinan Village has unique
advantages, such as convenient trafﬁc conditions, beautiful natural environment, profound
cultural heritage and foreign entrepreneurs. Thus, Xixinan Town was successfully added to
the list of the ﬁrst characteristic towns of Huangshan City in 2016. The local government has
formulated the development plan of Xixinan Village and determined the construction target
of a compound town driven by “tourism and creative industry”. The local government
began to build the “Xixinan Creative Town”, attracting nearly CNY 200 million of social
funds. Many new business forms have emerged, including Turenxueshe International
Design Institute, Weiyanfu homestay inns, Qingxihanyue homestay inns, Xiguan Art Space,
Huaxia Film Television Cultural and Creative Center and Chengzhuo Art Creation Center.
The tourism industry of Xixinan Village has developed rapidly. Its popularity has gradually
increased, along with the rising number of tourists. In 2018, Xixinan Village received
360,000 tourists throughout the year. In 2019, it received approximately 415,000 tourists.
The number of tourists received an annual increase of 15.3%. In the same year, it won the
title of the top 50 most beautiful characteristic towns in the country and the title of the most
attractive tourist characteristic town in the Yangtze River Delta. In 2019, it became one of
the “National Rural Tourism Key Villages”.
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 8 of 19
Since 2015, many local villagers who left for work have returned to their hometowns.
By 2019, approximately 200 villagers have returned to their hometowns (interview data,
E6). Most of them set up homestays inns and restaurants, such as Xibianrenjia and Heyunx-
iaoyuan Homestay, and more than 50 in total. At this stage, the government and enterprises
cooperate to actively speed up the construction of infrastructure and public recreational
places in Xixinan Village, promote the construction of characteristic towns and famous
villages, strengthen comprehensive environmental improvement, innovate management
methods, improve the landscape of the village and create a rural pastoral life. During this
period, the production of immigrant gentriﬁcation space began to extend from “home”
to “public space”, such as the construction of stone roads, the maintenance of ruins and
broken walls and the remediation and management of Fengyanglin and Fengle River. In
addition, Xixinan Village has become a “concentration place” of boutique homestays run
by immigrants, creating a convergent gentriﬁcation space (Figure 1).
4.2. Impacts of Rural Gentriﬁcation in Xixinan Village
Following the interviews with 60 different types of residents in Xixinan Village, four
characteristic categories of the rural gentriﬁcation process in Xixinan Village are extracted,
i.e., population growth, landscape change, economic structure and cultural turn.
4.2.1. Population Growth
Demographic change in rural areas is the most prominent manifestation of rural
gentriﬁcation, which involves the unique characteristics of population migration from cities
to rural areas, including “immigrants and returning villagers”. It leads to an increase in the
total population in rural areas and adds diversity to the social structure of the population in
the villages. At the end of 2005, the total number of households in Xixinan Village was 952,
with a population of 3143. At the end of 2010, there were 1280 households with 3840 people
in the village. Since 2016, the population in the village has increased signiﬁcantly. In 2019,
there were 1365 households with 5273 people, that is, an increase of 1433 people and an
increase of more than 1/3.
The ﬁrst category of “gentriﬁers” entering Xixinan Village is the urban middle class,
which plays a pioneering role. These immigrants are divided into two stages of immi-
gration. The ﬁrst stage is mostly spontaneous lifestyle and retirement immigration. In
2009, under the promotion of the Huangshan Municipal Government’s project of “One
Thousand Houses in One Hundred Villages”, some pioneers came to Xixinan Village one
after another; approximately 12 households (interview data: A1) were affected by the
rich cultural heritage of Xixinan Village and attracted by the high-quality ecological en-
vironment. Immigrants during this period are all from Shenzhen City. The ﬁrst-comers
recommended to their friends through word of mouth, and all were urban middle and
upper class. As the owner of Fenglecaotang from Shenzhen said,
We came to Xixinan in 2009. Upon arrival, we felt that this place was very good and
liveable. So, we actively recommended it to our friends. We brought more than 20 Shenzhen
friends over one after another, and then our friends brought friends. All of a sudden, we
ﬁred up this village. For example, the village was visited by ﬁlm directors (Huaxia Film
and Television Cultural and Creative Base), LED wedding photography (everlasting) and
so on. Through their power, the village was publicized, and more powerful entrepreneurs
were brought in.
The second stage is mainly for investment and entrepreneurial immigrants in cultural,
creative and art categories. In 2015, Prof. Yu Kongjian of Peking University launched
the “Wangshan Life” rural construction practice, which largely enhanced the reputation
of Xixinan Village. In 2016, the “Xixinan Creative Town” project was launched. Under
the strong investment promotion of the government, many new business types and new
enterprises have emerged, such as Shilili ·Weiyanfu, Xuliqiaoge, Yuanzili, Mengxi ·Fanghui,
Xiguan Art Center and Jinxi South Bank. A marked increase has been noted in the number
of migrants in the village. By September 2019, Xixinan Village has attracted a total of
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 9 of 19
73 high-end talents. These immigrants are mainly from Shenzhen, Beijing, Shanghai and
other big cities. They generally have a high level of education and knowledge. The income
level is relatively high.
The second type of “gentriﬁers” in Xixinan Village is the returning immigrants. These
are villagers who had gone out to work and returned to their hometown to start a business.
This phenomenon is a relatively special manifestation in the process of rural gentriﬁcation.
With the rapid development of Xixinan Village in recent years, many local villagers who
left for work began to return to their hometowns to start businesses since 2015. By 2019,
approximately 200 villagers returned to their hometowns (interview data, E6). These
returning migrants are divided into two groups. One group refers to villagers who worked
or started businesses in other places. After several years or decades of experience, their
vision and knowledge have been largely improved. They also have a lot of savings.
These returning immigrants bring rich cultural experience and sufﬁcient capital to return
to their hometown to start a business. The owner of Xibianrenjia homestay inn shared
the following:
In the past few years, the development of Xixinan has changed a lot, and it has turned
the world upside down. In the past, this street (Xibian Street) was like a place to shoot
Liaozhai, and it was very deserted. Now, it’s totally different. Our family used to work in
Wenzhou for 15 years. In 2016, we returned to our hometown to open a homestay. There
is an old ancestral house in the family, which cannot be abandoned. I want to renovate it
and protect it well. (C1).
The other group refers to young children who have received a good education abroad.
They use what they have learned to actively devote themselves to the protection of ancient
dwellings and the construction of their hometowns, such as the owner of the Wuhao
homestay inn in Back Street and the son of the owner of Yuqingzhai homestay inn. They
are a young generation who have injected vitality into the development of Xixinan Village
after returning from school with their experiences:
I am a native of Xixinan Village and a designer. I have worked in Shenzhen City before,
and now the village has developed well. I came back in 2017 and opened a homestay inn
in the village. I made the homestay, house decoration and design myself. (C3).
In addition, some older generation villagers return to the village due to hometown
plot, and nostalgia for childhood life. They lived in the city and were disgusted by the
hustle and bustle of city life. After they retired, they chose to return to Xixinan Village for
the elderly years. Although they have returned to the countryside, they are not completely
ordinary rural residents, but more of them return to their hometown in silken robes.
Some of the migrants in Xixinan Village are labor migrants who come for work.
For example, Shilili ·Weiyanfu and Xuliqiaoge homestay inn are national chain boutique
B&Bs/hotels, which are operated by enterprises. Their staff members, especially those who
need professional knowledge and skills, such as homestay managers, are recruited from
the city by the company. The housekeepers and staff at the Zhulinbian ·Jinxi South Bank all
moved to Xixinan as a whole following the transfer of the boss:
Our boss opened a homestay inn a long time ago, but it was in the Huangshan Scenic Spot
before. The previous year, the boss moved to Xixinan. We followed the boss here. (D24).
In addition, Xixinan Village is only 15 km away from the urban area of Huangshan
City, and it takes approximately half an hour to drive. Therefore, there are also many
residents in the urban area of Huangshan or residents/villagers in surrounding villages
and towns who only work in Xixinan Village during the day and return home to rest at
night. Although they do not live in Xixinan Village, they have also become the labor force:
My family lives in Tunxi Old Street, and it is very convenient to drive from here. (D20).
By the end of 2019, the Xixinan Village had created a total of 300 new jobs, and the
average annual salary of employees increased by more than 10%. The excellent working
environment and constantly improving salary level attracted a rising number of foreign
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 10 of 19
workers. In general, these immigrants have improved the overall quality of the population
of Xixinan Village, and the population and social structure of Xixinan Village have been
gradually diversiﬁed.
4.2.2. Landscape Changes
The landscape changes in Xixinan Village are primarily manifested in three aspects: the
spatial form of the village, the housing landscape and the street landscape. First of all, from
the perspective of the spatial form changes of Xixinan Village, the expansion of construction
land is obvious after the entry of newcomers. Since 2009, the foreign population has steadily
increased, and the government’s efforts to expropriate land and attract investment have
been increasing (Figure 2). The agricultural land in the ancient village of Shang Village
beside Fengnan Road and the town government has all been transformed into land for
housing construction. Xixinan–Shang Village has become a gathering place for immigrants.
Another gathering place is the newly built Sweet Community behind the Xixinan Town
Government, which is a resettlement house provided by the government for local villagers,
especially those in ancient villages. It is hoped that the villagers will move from the ancient
houses, which are handed over to the government for storage and protection. In addition,
the number of new houses along Fengnan Avenue behind the village has also increased
signiﬁcantly. Additionally, the public recreational places and public service facilities in
Xixinan Village have been signiﬁcantly expanded, such as the south and north squares,
pavilions and tourist public toilets for villagers and tourists and parking lots, all of which
have promoted the expansion of the Xixinan Village space and the overall change in the
built environment.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 20 
 
Our boss opened a homestay inn a long time ago, but it was in the Huangshan Scenic 
Spot before. The previous year, the boss moved to Xixinan. We followed the boss here. 
(D24) . 
In addition, Xixinan  Village is only 15 km away from the urban area of Huangshan 
City, and it takes approximately half an hour to drive. Therefore, there are also many res-
idents in the urban area of Huangshan or residents/villagers in surrounding villages and 
towns who only w ork in Xixinan Village during the day and return home to rest at night.  
Although they do not live in Xixinan Village, they have also become the labor force : 
My family lives in Tunxi Old Street, and it is very convenient to drive from here. 
(D20) . 
By the en d of 2019, the Xixinan Village  had created a total of 300 new jobs, and the 
average annual salary of employees increased by more than 10%. The excellent working 
environment and constantly improving salary level attracted a rising number of foreign 
workers.  In general, these immigrants have improved the overall quality of the population 
of Xixinan Village, and the population and social structure of Xixinan Village have been 
gradually diversified . 
4.2.2. Landscape Changes  
The landscape changes in Xixinan Vill age are primarily manifested in three  aspects: 
the spatial form of the village, the housing landscape and the street landscape. First of all, 
from the perspective of the spatial form changes of Xixinan Village, the expansion of con-
struction land is obvious  after the entry of newcomers . Since 2009, the foreign population 
has steadily increased, and the government ’s efforts to expropriate land and attract in-
vestment have been increasing (Figure 2). The agricultural land in the ancient village of 
Shang Village  beside Fengnan Road and  the town government has all been transformed 
into land for housing construction. Xixinan –Shang Village has become a gathering place 
for immigrants . Another gathering place is  the newly built Sweet Community behind the 
Xixinan Town Government , which is  a resettlement house provided by the government 
for local villagers, especially those in ancient villages. It is hoped that the villagers will 
move from the ancient houses , which are handed over to the government for storage and 
protec tion. In addition, the number of new houses along Fengnan Avenue behind the vil-
lage has also increased significantly. Additionally, the public recreational places and pub-
lic service facilities in Xixinan Village have been significantly expanded, such as th e south 
and north squares, pavilions and tourist public toilets for villagers and tourists and park-
ing lots, all of which have promoted the expansion of the Xixinan Village space and the 
overall change in the built environment . 
  
Figure 2. Spatial form distribution  map of Xixinan Village  (left in 2010, right  in 2019 ). 
Figure 2. Spatial form distribution map of Xixinan Village ( leftin 2010, right in 2019).
The housing landscape is the most intuitive feature of gentrification in Xixinan Village
because the foreign middle class has invested a lot of time, energy and money in the restoration
of dilapidated buildings. Accordingly, the unused homesteads and abandoned plots are
reused, and the housing space is reconstructed. Prof. Yu Kongjian transformed the idle
township government building into a boutique resort hotel—Hetianli Hotel—and set a good
example for the renovation of local ancient buildings and the design of homestays [ 9]. The
design of Hetianli Hotel respects the original building layout and structure, retains the original
heritage features and even preserves the original commune canteen cooking bench. He filled
in new functions (such as the meeting room transformed into the lobby of a boutique hotel)
and added modern life elements (such as floor heating, lighting and ventilation). These can
realize the preservation, regeneration and reuse of heritage buildings [ 9]. The houses in
Xixinan Village are all ancient Hui-style dwellings and newly built dwellings with “white
walls and black tiles” (Figure 3).
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 11 of 19
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 20 
 
The h ousing landscape is the most intuitive feature of gentrification in Xixinan Vil-
lage because the foreign middle class has invested a lot of time, energy and money in the 
restoration of dilapidated buildings. Accordingly, the unused homesteads and abandoned 
plots are reused, and the housing space is reconstructed. Prof. Yu Kongjian transformed 
the idle township government building into a boutique resort hotel —Hetianli Hotel —and 
set a good example for the renovation of local ancient buildings and the design of 
homestays [9]. The design of Hetianli Hotel respects the original building layout  and 
structure, retains the original heritage features and even preserves the original co mmune 
canteen cooking bench . He filled in new functions (such as the meeting room transformed 
into the lobby of a boutique hotel) and added modern life elements (such as floor heating, 
lighting and ventilation). These can realize the preservation, regenera tion and reuse of 
heritage buildings  [9]. The houses in Xixinan Village are all ancient Hui -style dwellings 
and newly built dwellings with “white walls and black tiles ” (Figure 3). 
  
Figure 3. The appearance of houses in Xixinan Village (photo s by the author s, left is old houses, 
right  is new houses ). 
The interior decoration style of immigrant houses is unique and different.  Some an-
cient dwellings are repaired as “old as the old ”, and others are integrated into the new 
ones. The old chimney was transformed into an entertainment bar; the wooden showcases 
were glazed and affixed with window grilles; the stone floor was replaced by patterned 
tiles. The patio with outdoor lighting is sealed with glass and installed with chandeliers, 
which not only pr events the rainy and humid climate from corroding wooden door beams 
but also does not affect the lighting. Moreover, Huizhou is very cold in winter. To adapt 
to the environment here, the owner of Fenglecaotang designed a stove himself:  
I designed this table stove myself, and we teach them how to do it with the specialists 
and carpenters! It will be warm when my guests can chat around the table stove.  
In addition, migrants have equipped their homes with modern equipment and ser-
vices such as projectors, swimming pools and bars (Figure 4). 
  
Figure 4. Interior landscape of new comers’  houses in Xixinan Village . 
Figure 3. The appearance of houses in Xixinan Village (photos by the authors, leftis old houses, right
is new houses).
The interior decoration style of immigrant houses is unique and different. Some
ancient dwellings are repaired as “old as the old”, and others are integrated into the new
ones. The old chimney was transformed into an entertainment bar; the wooden showcases
were glazed and afﬁxed with window grilles; the stone ﬂoor was replaced by patterned
tiles. The patio with outdoor lighting is sealed with glass and installed with chandeliers,
which not only prevents the rainy and humid climate from corroding wooden door beams
but also does not affect the lighting. Moreover, Huizhou is very cold in winter. To adapt to
the environment here, the owner of Fenglecaotang designed a stove himself:
I designed this table stove myself, and we teach them how to do it with the specialists and
carpenters! It will be warm when my guests can chat around the table stove.
In addition, migrants have equipped their homes with modern equipment and services
such as projectors, swimming pools and bars (Figure 4).
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 20 
 
The h ousing landscape is the most intuitive feature of gentrification in Xixinan Vil-
lage because the foreign middle class has invested a lot of time, energy and money in the 
restoration of dilapidated buildings. Accordingly, the unused homesteads and abandoned 
plots are reused, and the housing space is reconstructed. Prof. Yu Kongjian transformed 
the idle township government building into a boutique resort hotel —Hetianli Hotel —and 
set a good example for the renovation of local ancient buildings and the design of 
homestays [9]. The design of Hetianli Hotel respects the original building layout  and 
structure, retains the original heritage features and even preserves the original co mmune 
canteen cooking bench . He filled in new functions (such as the meeting room transformed 
into the lobby of a boutique hotel) and added modern life elements (such as floor heating, 
lighting and ventilation). These can realize the preservation, regenera tion and reuse of 
heritage buildings  [9]. The houses in Xixinan Village are all ancient Hui -style dwellings 
and newly built dwellings with “white walls and black tiles ” (Figure 3). 
  
Figure 3. The appearance of houses in Xixinan Village (photo s by the author s, left is old houses, 
right  is new houses ). 
The interior decoration style of immigrant houses is unique and different.  Some an-
cient dwellings are repaired as “old as the old ”, and others are integrated into the new 
ones. The old chimney was transformed into an entertainment bar; the wooden showcases 
were glazed and affixed with window grilles; the stone floor was replaced by patterned 
tiles. The patio with outdoor lighting is sealed with glass and installed with chandeliers, 
which not only pr events the rainy and humid climate from corroding wooden door beams 
but also does not affect the lighting. Moreover, Huizhou is very cold in winter. To adapt 
to the environment here, the owner of Fenglecaotang designed a stove himself:  
I designed this table stove myself, and we teach them how to do it with the specialists 
and carpenters! It will be warm when my guests can chat around the table stove.  
In addition, migrants have equipped their homes with modern equipment and ser-
vices such as projectors, swimming pools and bars (Figure 4). 
  
Figure 4. Interior landscape of new comers’  houses in Xixinan Village . 
Figure 4. Interior landscape of newcomers’ houses in Xixinan Village.
The streetscape of Xixinan Village has also undergone obvious changes, such as
the improvement of the street environment and the sanitary environment as well as the
beautiﬁcation of the overall style of the village (Figure 5). In terms of street environment
management, the government fully completed the restoration of the stone road and broken
walls in the village in 2017. On this basis, the stone road and courtyard walls were
beautiﬁed, and the courtyard environment was improved. Since 2017, the government
has held a “Beautiful Courtyard” selection event every year to promote planting ﬂowers
and other plants among the villagers. In terms of beautifying the overall style of villages,
the government established a leading group for the improvement of the overall style and
appearance of characteristic towns in Xixinan Town in 2018, to strengthen the beautiﬁcation
of the environment of ancient villages. For example, the water pipes are outsourced
with bamboo, the houses on Fengnan Avenue are painted, the storefronts are uniﬁed and
monitoring equipment is installed. As a result, the appearance of the village has been
greatly improved, and the villagers feel deeply about it:
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 12 of 19
The streets in the village have become much cleaner, the stone road has been repaired,
there is no garbage and the overall landscape has become more beautiful, which makes our
lives very happy. (D11).
Now, we also all know how to take care of the environment, keep the streets clean and stop
littering. Now, the village is cleaned every day, and the streets are clean. I also responded
to the government’s request and planted ﬂowers and plants in the yard and watered them
with rice-washing water every day, and they grew very well. (D16).
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 20 
 
The streetscape of Xixinan Village has als o undergone obvious  changes , such as the 
improvement of the street environment and the sanitary environment as well as the beau-
tification of the overall style of the village (Figure 5). In terms  of street environment man-
agement, the government fully comple ted the restoration of the stone road and broken 
walls in the village in 2017. On this basis, the stone road and courtyard walls were beau-
tified, and the courtyard environment was improved. Since 2017, the government has held 
a “Beautiful Courtyard ” select ion event every year to promote planting flowers and other 
plants among the villagers. In terms of beautifying the overall style of villages, the gov-
ernment established a leading group for the improvement of the overall style and appear-
ance of characterist ic towns in Xixinan Town in 2018 , to strengthen the beautification of 
the environment of ancient villages. For example, the water pipes are outsourced with 
bamboo, the houses on Fengnan Avenue are painted, the storefronts are unified and mon-
itoring equipme nt is installed.  As a result, the appearance of the village has been greatly 
improved, and the villagers feel deeply about it : 
The streets in the village have become much cleaner, the stone road has been repaired, 
there is no garbage and the overall landsc ape has become more beautiful, which makes 
our lives very happy. (D11) . 
Now, we also all know how to take care of the environment, keep the streets clean and 
stop littering. Now, the village is cleaned every day, and the streets are clean. I also 
responded to the government ’s request and planted flowers and plants in the yard and 
watered them with rice -washing water every day, and they grew very well. (D16) . 
 
Figure 5. Current situation of the landscape in the village of Xixinan  Village  (photo s by the author s, 
left is bluestone road , middle  is flowers growing along the courtyard wall , right  is beautiful court-
yard) . 
4.2.3. Economic Transformation  
The economic structure of Xixinan  Village has undergone significant changes. Since 
the opening of the creative town in 2016, the rural tertiary ind ustries in Xixinan  Village 
have developed rapidly. Now, 69 characteristic cultural industries and tourism service 
industries have been built, including Yiyihuiguan, Qingxihanyue, Jinxi South Bank and 
Weiyanfu. In 2018, the direct output value of Xixinan Village tourism  was CNY 42 million, 
increasing the collective income of the village by CNY 260,000, and the per capita annual 
income by CNY 4800. This increase directly drove more than 600 farmers to increase their 
income, of which 30 farmers with 57 people were lifted out of  poverty. Figure 6 reflects 
the changes in the number of hotels, homestay inns and restaurants in Xixinan Village . 
From 2010 to August 2019, 37 tourist accommodations were reported in Xixinan Village. 
In 2016, the tourism and  accommodation industry in Xixi nan Village developed rapidly, 
and the number of homestay inns  increased significantly. At the same time, the restaurant 
service industry in the village has also begun to emerge gradually. Now, 18 restaurants 
are operating in the village, with the largest number of openings between 2016 and 2018. 
In general, with the gradual increase in the popularity of Xixinan Village and the increase 
Figure 5. Current situation of the landscape in the village of Xixinan Village (photos by the authors, left
is bluestone road, middle is flowers growing along the courtyard wall, right is beautiful courtyard).
4.2.3. Economic Transformation
The economic structure of Xixinan Village has undergone signiﬁcant changes. Since
the opening of the creative town in 2016, the rural tertiary industries in Xixinan Village
have developed rapidly. Now, 69 characteristic cultural industries and tourism service
industries have been built, including Yiyihuiguan, Qingxihanyue, Jinxi South Bank and
Weiyanfu. In 2018, the direct output value of Xixinan Village tourism was CNY 42 million,
increasing the collective income of the village by CNY 260,000, and the per capita annual
income by CNY 4800. This increase directly drove more than 600 farmers to increase their
income, of which 30 farmers with 57 people were lifted out of poverty. Figure 6 reﬂects
the changes in the number of hotels, homestay inns and restaurants in Xixinan Village.
From 2010 to August 2019, 37 tourist accommodations were reported in Xixinan Village.
In 2016, the tourism and accommodation industry in Xixinan Village developed rapidly,
and the number of homestay inns increased signiﬁcantly. At the same time, the restaurant
service industry in the village has also begun to emerge gradually. Now, 18 restaurants are
operating in the village, with the largest number of openings between 2016 and 2018. In
general, with the gradual increase in the popularity of Xixinan Village and the increase in
tourists, the economic structure has begun to shift to the tourism service industry. Not only
have the number of newcomer homestay owners increased, the local villagers have also
begun devoting themselves to homestay inns and restaurants.
Sustainability 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 20 
 
in tourists, the economic structure has begun to shift to the tourism service industry. Not 
only have the number of newcom er homestay owners increased, the local villagers have 
also begun devoting themselves to homestay  inns and restaurants.  
  
Figure 6. The number of homestays and restaurants increased over the years  (about 4 restaurants 
per year on average , up to August 2 019, data source: Xixinan Town Market Supervision Bureau ). 
With the influx of more and more migrants and enterprises, the housing prices in 
Xixinan  Village have also undergone profound changes, which are primarily reflected in 
two aspects . One is the price changes in ancient residential houses, and the other is the 
price changes in newly built residential houses. As shown in Table 2, from 2009 to 201 2, 
the price increase for old houses was small, but by 2018, the price increased rapidly, ap-
proximately 17 times that of 2009. From 2016 to 2018, the price of newly built houses that 
were idle in Xixinan –Shang Village also saw a relatively high increase fr om CNY 800,000 
in 2016 (covering an area of more than 300 sqm) to CNY 1.6 million. In 2009, the price for 
the first batch of migrants to buy  some abandoned houses, old rural constructions or 
homesteads in the village was relatively low, generally only a fe w hundred thousand  
CNY . However, with the gradual increase in the number of house buyers and the quick 
rise in housing prices, some vacant houses (Xixinan –Shang Village) were transformed into 
new residential buildings that are too expensive for local resid ents by migrants or enter-
prises. Notably, the housing formats (ancient dwellings/new dwellings) and the property 
values of different locations in Xixinan Village are not uniform.  
Table 2. Price changes of ancient residential houses and newly built resident ial houses in Xixinan . 
Year  Ancient Residential House 
Price /m2 Year  Ancient Residential House 
Price /m2 
2009  approximately CNY 600  2016  approximately CNY 2700  
2012  approximately CNY 1300    
2018  approximately CNY 10,000  2018  approximately CNY 5400  
Before 2009, ordinary houses could be bought for tens of thousands. For example, there 
is an old house in Xibian Street that is more than 80 sqm and more than 80,000. It is 
very broken, which is equivalent to buying a foundation. But if you buy it now, you  need 
at least 2 million, and you may not sell it. An ordinary house with two floors of 100 sqm, 
more than 1 million . (A1).  
The house in Xixinan –Shang Village is now 1.6 million, and there is no real estate cer-
tificate. The villagers in Xixinan Village wer e originally moved to it. The land price was 
cheap, but the villagers did not move, resulting in the land of Shang Village being idle. 
Later, the government entrusted immigrants to rent and sell this house. At that time, it 
was sold at 400,000 . (D6).  
4.2.4 . Cultural Turn  
With the influx of the new urban middle class , new aesthetic methods and cultural 
vitality have emerged in Xixinan. First , immigrants expressed their preference for the 
Figure 6. The number of homestays and restaurants increased over the years (about 4 restaurants per
year on average, up to August 2019, data source: Xixinan Town Market Supervision Bureau).
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 13 of 19
With the inﬂux of more and more migrants and enterprises, the housing prices in
Xixinan Village have also undergone profound changes, which are primarily reﬂected in
two aspects. One is the price changes in ancient residential houses, and the other is the price
changes in newly built residential houses. As shown in Table 2, from 2009 to 2012, the price
increase for old houses was small, but by 2018, the price increased rapidly, approximately
17 times that of 2009. From 2016 to 2018, the price of newly built houses that were idle
in Xixinan–Shang Village also saw a relatively high increase from CNY 800,000 in 2016
(covering an area of more than 300 sqm) to CNY 1.6 million. In 2009, the price for the ﬁrst
batch of migrants to buy some abandoned houses, old rural constructions or homesteads
in the village was relatively low, generally only a few hundred thousand CNY. However,
with the gradual increase in the number of house buyers and the quick rise in housing
prices, some vacant houses (Xixinan–Shang Village) were transformed into new residential
buildings that are too expensive for local residents by migrants or enterprises. Notably, the
housing formats (ancient dwellings/new dwellings) and the property values of different
locations in Xixinan Village are not uniform.
Before 2009, ordinary houses could be bought for tens of thousands. For example, there is
an old house in Xibian Street that is more than 80 sqm and more than 80,000. It is very
broken, which is equivalent to buying a foundation. But if you buy it now, you need at
least 2 million, and you may not sell it. An ordinary house with two ﬂoors of 100 sqm,
more than 1 million. (A1).
The house in Xixinan–Shang Village is now 1.6 million, and there is no real estate
certiﬁcate. The villagers in Xixinan Village were originally moved to it. The land price
was cheap, but the villagers did not move, resulting in the land of Shang Village being
idle. Later, the government entrusted immigrants to rent and sell this house. At that
time, it was sold at 400,000. (D6).
Table 2. Price changes of ancient residential houses and newly built residential houses in Xixinan.
Year Ancient Residential House Price/m2Year Ancient Residential House Price/m2
2009 approximately CNY 600 2016 approximately CNY 2700
2012 approximately CNY 1300
2018 approximately CNY 10,000 2018 approximately CNY 5400
4.2.4. Cultural Turn
With the inﬂux of the new urban middle class, new aesthetic methods and cultural
vitality have emerged in Xixinan. First, immigrants expressed their preference for the
long-standing historical buildings and profound Huizhou culture of Xixinan Village. They
entered Xixinan Village to explore and study Huizhou architecture and Huizhou culture
and use their knowledge and wealth to repair and protect ancient dwellings. For example,
a middle-class immigrant who has lived in Xixinan Village for 10 years said,
We feel that the ancient dwellings of Huizhou culture are very precious and need to be
protected, and we need to do our part for it. To protect ancient dwellings and inherit our
traditional culture, we came to this village with such mentality. (A1).
Furthermore, it leads to the change in spatial cultural production and villagers’ skill
accomplishment in Xixinan village. This phenomenon is reﬂected in the new space cre-
ated by immigrants in Xixinan–Shang Village. For example, the decoration of homestay
inns in Xixinan–Shang Village introduces Western culture and fashion styles, including
British-style manors, bars, ﬁreplaces, etc. After receiving professional training, the local
employees employed by the newcomers have mastered additional knowledge about hotel
management, such as ﬂower arrangement and tea making, and become knowledgeable
and aesthetic people. In terms of food culture, they change the traditional cooking methods
of heavy oil, heavy color and salty Anhui cuisine, thus adjusting the taste of dishes and
maintain healthy eating habits. In terms of cultural pursuits, the immigrants’ respect for
local traditional houses, handmade products, tools and the wilderness and nature raises
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 14 of 19
local villagers’ awareness of the symbolic meaning, intrinsic quality and economic value of
these products. It also promotes cultural conﬁdence. Again, these lifestyle immigrants and
homestay hosts bring the idea of green production of agricultural products. Devoted to the
ﬁeld, they are the “new farmers”. According to the modern agriculture idea, they create or-
ganic green vegetable gardens and orchards, produce organic rice, corn and vegetables and
do not use pesticides and chemical fertilizers. On one hand, they provide for themselves
and their friends by using homemade food and wine. On the other hand, they supply these
to their guests, even these homemade food and wine become homestay facility attractions.
Immigrants especially emphasized the aesthetic preference for “wilderness” as reﬂected in
their opinion:
Xixinan Village itself is a pure land, a wilderness place. What urban people come to see
here, what they see is wild, natural, the original ecology (where human footprints have
not reached). But the government has pulled up the turf and wild vines, destroying this
environment. So, we must protect the wilderness. (A2).
They often give advice to the local government and the village committee, urging the
protection of the pristine wetland of the maple forest at the entrance of the village, the
management and protection of the Fengle River and the treatment of sewage and garbage
in the village.
In addition, the conscious act of bringing art and culture into the countryside by the
urban middle class is the force behind the gentriﬁcation [ 33]. Immigrants often organize
art, culture and research activities. The “Wangshan Life” project chaired by Yu Kongjian
has carried out a substantial amount of work in this regard, such as the International
Cello Music Festival, the “Huizhou Country Squire Music Collection” rural music festival
and “Turenxueshe” to carry out international training of rural design talents. It also
introduced new creative industry culture. It has attracted many batches of architecture
and landscape design students from Harvard University, University of Southern California
and University of Buffalo to study and conduct design courses here [ 9]. The holding of
these activities attracted a number of musicians and academic experts to gather in Xixinan
Village, strengthened the exchanges with foreign cultures and enriched the beautiful artistic
temperament of Xixinan Village and the cultural connotation of Huizhou.
5. Discussion
This paper explains the gentriﬁcation of Xixinan Village and its inﬂuence from the
perspectives of consumption orientation, production orientation and the unique role of
the government.
5.1. Consumption-Oriented
From a consumption perspective, the existence of a new cultural class seeking to
consume rural space and the transformation of middle-class consumption patterns are one
of the main inﬂuencing factors of gentriﬁcation in Xixinan Village. Since the reform and
opening up of China in 1978, it has experienced rapid development for more than 40 years
and has formed the world’s most populous middle-income group, with a population
of approximately 400 million in China. These people have a strong “rural complex” [ 9].
Lifestyle preferences are the main driving force behind the migration of new cultural classes
to rural areas. A series of urban problems (environmental pollution, trafﬁc congestion,
housing congestion, busy work, noise interference, etc.) brought about by urbanization
have exhausted the middle class of the standardized and simplistic stylized urban life.
These awakened their yearning for the rural life of “returning to nature”, enjoying the
sunshine, air, water and freedom of the countryside, releasing the mind and ﬁnding
oneself. Now, in some rural areas, good physical infrastructure and public services can
be provided. Compared with the over-commercialized surrounding ancient villages such
as Xidi Hongcun, the value of Xixinan Village lies in its feature as a non-commercialized
village. The entire village is nestled beside the Fengle River and secluded behind the maple
forest. The villagers still live their ordinary days at sunrise, without bars, neon lights or
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 15 of 19
bustling commercial streets. The rural space is not disturbed by modern external forces
and retains the characteristics of traditional Chinese rural areas. At the same time, safe and
healthy organic food, clean water and air, simple neighborhood relationships and healthy
outdoor sports (mountain biking) make Xixinan Village a “good place for retirement”. This
unique rural environment and pastoral lifestyle precisely attract the middle-class people to
the village. Most of the immigrants interviewed by the author expressed that.
Coming to Xixinan Village is experiencing a kind of life looking at the mountains. You
can see the mountains; see the water and remember to live in nostalgia, leisure, quiet and
comfortable. (A9).
The reason why I chose to stay here is because of the connection with ‘Huizhou’, and
because of the ‘undeveloped’ original ecological style in Xixinan Village. (A11).
The personal preferences of the new cultural class will directly lead to changes in their
consumption patterns. Whilst immigrants create personalized residential landscapes, the
idyll is constructed as a unique rural cultural taste and cultural connotation experience
and through various media discourse practices to spread about their own “ideology”
and “aesthetic”. They promoted the cultural construction of Xixinan Village and the
commercialization of rural space, and produced what the middle class wanted to consume:
a “garden style” rural landscape and cultural identity.
I like living in Xixinan not only because of its beautiful environment and fresh air but
also because there is a social circle. In this circle, we have similar cultural preferences,
values and ideologies, and we all enjoy the current rural life. (A9).
Here, far from the hustle and bustle of the city, you can’t see the row upon row of
prosperous high-rise buildings, and you can’t hear the noise of the busy trafﬁc, but there is
the ‘return to the countryside’ that the ancients yearned for, and it is full of paradise-like
secrets and detachment. (A11).
5.2. Production-Oriented
Production is another important cause of rural gentriﬁcation. Gentriﬁcation has
emerged in China in a rapidly developing and transforming society [ 34]. Under the impact
of industrialization and rapid urbanization, rural areas continue to decline, and the status
of agricultural production and agricultural economy continues to decline. Capital gathers
in big cities and the gap between urban and rural areas is widening. The difﬁculty and
low efﬁciency of agricultural production and the difﬁculty of rural life have led to the
low enthusiasm of rural agricultural production and the outﬂow of the rural population
in Xixinan Village. These rural difﬁculties are the result of industrialization thinking.
In addition, Xixinan Village is located in the upper reaches of the Fengle River, close to
the water source, and the local government has made strict protection regulations for it.
Therefore, it is only a supply base of agricultural products and cheap labor, with lagging
infrastructure construction and low actual land rent, and it is rarely patronized by proﬁt-
seeking capital. Therefore, the rural areas also form a state similar to the urban “land rent
gap”, and the actual value of rural resources is far underestimated by the industrialized
market value evaluation system.
In the context of post-modernism, the transformation of the personal preferences and
consumption patterns of middle-class consumers, the natural environment and lifestyle of
a traditional village conform to the imagination of today’s society for rural areas. Therefore,
the idyllic lifestyle and well-preserved rural cultural landscape of Xixinan Village are
gradually favored by the urban middle class and capital. At the same time, the opening of
Hefei–Huangshan Expressway in 2007 and the completion and use of Huangshan North
Station of the high-speed railway in 2015 have made the location advantages of Xixinan
Village prominent. On this basis, the land value of Xixinan Village is re-evaluated and
the potential land rent keeps rising, leading to the emergence of a “rent gap”, which
drives more urban capital to the countryside. It provides a large number of production
factors such as manpower, capital, technology, culture and resources for the development
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 16 of 19
of the countryside. Driven by interests, the government, enterprises and villagers began
to cater to the consumption needs of immigrants and tourists, and produced gentriﬁed
rural landscapes, which promoted the activation, reconstruction and rehabilitation of rural
communities. It is worth noting that the urban middle class is not only the consumer
of rural space, but also the producer of gentriﬁcation space. They bring their cultural
preferences and aesthetic ways into Xixinan Village to construct new culture and produce
rural space.
5.3. The Unique Role of Government
Rural gentriﬁcation in the West is often described as “counter-urbanization” or “com-
fort migration” [ 35], while rural gentriﬁcation in China is mainly based on the background
of rapid urbanization in China [ 11]. There is the urban–rural dual economic structure in
China. This refers to the coexistence of an urban economy characterized by socialized
production and a rural economy characterized by small-scale agricultural production. This
has led to the migration of the rural population to cities, the population reduction and
aging in rural areas, and led to the emergence of more rural vacant and idle real estate,
which provides a ready-made property supply for potential immigrants and the middle
class. Meanwhile, compared with cities, the use of rural land in China has problems such
as “dispersion”, “fragmentation”, “low utilization rate” and “low efﬁciency”, and the land
collectively owned by villages is excluded from the capitalization of the land market [ 36].
In order to revitalize idle rural land, it is very necessary to drive the development of rural
areas by attracting external capital with new methods and market-oriented means. In
China, the government plays a direct and critical role in promoting or inhibiting rural
land reform. Chinese governments at all levels have issued relevant laws, regulations and
reform strategies in accordance with the authority granted by law and certain processes.
Then rural land property rights are redistributed, restrictions on rural land market transfer
are relaxed and urban capital is introduced into the countryside. These provide a prereq-
uisite for promoting the development of rural gentriﬁcation. Therefore, in the process of
rural gentriﬁcation in China, the government plays an important role and participates in
every process of gentriﬁcation from top to bottom, which is determined by China’s special
political background, governance system and land property right system.
In the ﬁrst stage of rural gentriﬁcation in Xixinan Village, the local government carried
out the reform and exploration of “supply side structural reform” on the original land
property right system. The implementation plan of the protection and utilization project of
“One Thousand Houses in One Hundred Villages” was launched by the local government,
which encouraged newcomers and social capital to settle in Xixinan Village to protect old
houses and the ancient village. This does not violate and break through the framework
of China’s existing basic economic system. In the second stage, the local government
cooperated with enterprises to actively advocate the development of tourism and accom-
modation industry, guide immigrants to operate homestays, and attract more investment
and more external cultural enterprises. In terms of housing prices and housing sales, the
government has also changed from the initial laissez faire to strengthening management. It
began to formulate relevant regulations to restrict the private land transactions and sales.
Later, it invested in the purchase of villagers’ old houses, and transformed home land into
construction land, so as to gradually standardize land transactions. By October 2019, the
local government funded the collection and storage of 63 houses in the village, and the
circulation of 46 houses, so as to revitalize the idle homesteads, revitalize the land value
of Xixinan Village and pave the way for the process of rural gentriﬁcation. This is also a
beneﬁcial attempt to reuse rural land resources under the urban–rural dual land structure
in China.
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 17 of 19
6. Conclusions and Limitations
6.1. Conclusions
This paper tries to analyze the emergence and impacts of rural gentriﬁcation in Xixinan
Village, and obtains the following conclusions:
(1) Since the reform and opening up in 1978, the young and middle-aged labor force
of Xixinan Village has gradually gone to the city to work, and the permanent resident
population was in a declining trend. In 2009, 12 ancient houses in Xixinan Village were
purchased by immigrants with the support of government policies related to ancient
houses, and new “gentlemen” started to settle in the ancient village. In 2015, the opening
of Huangshan North Railway Station of the high-speed railway and the participation of Yu
Kongjian, a famous scholar from Peking University, further promoted the gentriﬁcation
process of Xixinan Village with more and more far-reaching inﬂuence.
(2) The impacts of rural gentriﬁcation in Xixinan Village:
1⃝The population structure tends to be diversiﬁed. The gentriﬁer in Xixinan Village
is not a single urban middle class. Immigrants, investors, returning immigrants, local
villagers, the government and tourists have all participated in the gentriﬁcation process of
Xixinan Village. “Gentriﬁers” mainly includes the urban lifestyle type of gentriﬁer, new
township construction type of gentriﬁer and returning entrepreneurial type of gentriﬁer,
among which the lifestyle type of gentriﬁer is the pioneer of rural gentriﬁcation and the
new township construction type of gentriﬁer is the main thinker of rural gentriﬁcation.
With the continuous participation of immigrants, the local population is growing.
2⃝Landscape changes. The landscape changes in Xixinan Village reﬂect the strong
inﬂuence of rural gentriﬁcation. One is the traditional ancient dwelling-style architectural
landscape of “repairing the old as the old and the old as new”. The appearance features of
Hui-style architecture, “white wall, black tile, horse head wall”, are prominent, and the
interior decoration is exquisite, and the living comfort and aesthetics have been greatly
improved. The other is new buildings with “various styles and multi-dimensional symbio-
sis”, such as the emergence of Xixinan–Shang Village and the preference for new housing
landscapes to create “village pastoral, slow life”. Along with the expansion of the spatial
form of the villages, newly built “new villages” (sweet communities) and “enclave areas”
(Shang Village) appeared.
3⃝Structure of the economy has changed markedly. Especially since the launch of
the creative town in 2016, Xixinan rural tourism services and cultural–creative industries
have developed rapidly, and homestay and catering services have increased rapidly. How-
ever, compared with homestays run by local villagers, middle-class homestay owners
are not proﬁt-oriented. Their main purpose is to pursue a speciﬁc rural way of life and
preserve local culture. They do not want Xixinan Village to be over-developed and over-
commercialized but to be a place to create emotional and authentic experiences. Great
changes have also taken place in housing prices, including the rapid rise in the price of
ancient houses and new houses.
4⃝Cultural turn. Certain class and cultural differences exist between immigrants
and local villagers. These immigrants brought some new consumption concepts, aesthetic
methods and urban living habits and mapped their own cultural logic to the rural space.
So, the local villagers gradually shifted from the desire for industrial civilization to the
pursuit of post-industrial civilization.
(3) This paper provides an understanding of the emergence of rural gentriﬁcation in
Xixinan Village in China. From the perspective of consumption, the rise of the huge urban
middle class has a strong “local complex” and desire to return to the countryside, and they
project their cultural brand into the rural landscape construction. From the perspective of
production, Xixinan Village has been dominated by traditional agriculture for a long time,
and the actual value of rural resources has been underestimated. With the arrival of the post-
industrial era, along with the improvement of transportation location and communication
facilities, the land value of Xixinan Village is re-evaluated, with the potential land rent rising.
The expansion of the “rent gap” attracts various urban capital. The government plays
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10077 18 of 19
an extremely important role in the gentriﬁcation process of Xixinan Village. It constantly
explores and innovates, launches new policies, promotes the protection of ancient dwellings
and the transfer of homesteads, rejuvenates the land value of Xixinan Village and paves the
way for the process of rural gentriﬁcation.
6.2. Limitations
Contemporary eastern China is undergoing a rapid restructuring process, which is
characterized by the transformation from a production landscape to consumption landscape.
In this context, the application of rural gentriﬁcation theory to study the development
and transformation of rural areas has attracted more and more scholars’ attention and
exploration. However, there are still relatively few studies on the rural gentriﬁcation in
China. There is still a deliberate attempt to conduct gentriﬁcation research on Xixinan
Village as the destination of traditional village types. There are also some shortcomings in
this study. First, in the research process, only interviews were selected instead of structured
questionnaires, so the full sample survey of village residents can be further strengthened
in the future. Second, in the process of rural gentriﬁcation, the social integration of local
residents and newcomers is an issue worthy of attention, which is not covered in this study
and needs to be further explored in future studies. In addition, the “class displacement”
problem has been a focus in existing research. This study found no signiﬁcant “class replace-
ment” phenomenon in the rural gentriﬁcation in China, consistent with existing relevant
research [ 6]. However, there exists “class displacement” in Western rural gentriﬁcation,
inconsistent with relevant Western studies [ 37]. It may be associated with China’s special
land property right system, in which rural homesteads and farmers’ houses cannot be
freely traded. However, in the long run, whether local residents will be marginalized or
“displaced” needs further observation and follow-up research.
Author Contributions: S.L. provided the research idea, solved the critical technical problems and
framed the whole research paper. X.R. contributed to the ﬁeld research and substantial data collection,
and she wrote the ﬁrst draft of this paper. P .D. conducted a proofreading of the entire text, including
a check of data and literature sources. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant no. 41971171).
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was approved by the Academic Committee at the
School of Environmental and Geographical Sciences of Shanghai Normal University.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
