Comprehending the gentriﬁcation of a suburb: the case
of Mulund, Mumbai
Sujayita Bhattacharjee
Published online: 9 August 2019
/C211Springer Nature B.V. 2019
Abstract The process of gentriﬁcation in recent
times has ventured beyond the inner city into territo-ries that are not accounted for in the conventional
wisdom associated with the phenomenon. Such has
been the case of gentriﬁcation in Mulund, a suburb ofMumbai in India, where the occurrence of gentriﬁca-
tion challenges the traditional understanding of the
process. Mulund once used to be an industrial suburbwhere engineering and pharmaceutical industries were
operational. Today, the suburb is gentriﬁed with most
of the old industrial structures replaced by high rises,malls, and multiplexes. Gentriﬁcation has brought
about a revolutionary change to the suburb and has
signiﬁcantly redeﬁned its characteristics. Yet, unlikethe process of gentriﬁcation in the inner-city areas of
Mumbai, that has been studied far and wide; the
suburban gentriﬁcation of Mulund has been over-looked. This calls for studying the process of suburban
gentriﬁcation in Mulund. Accordingly, the study has
been undertaken to comprehend the gentriﬁcation ofMulund by dwelling on its causes, nature, and
implications. The study questions the applicability of
the existing theories of gentriﬁcation in the context ofMulund and attempts to answer it by applying both
qualitative and quantitative analysis. The results of the
study reveal that the conventional theories are onlypartially applicable to the case of Mulund’s gentriﬁ-
cation; therefore, requiring a renewed theoreticalunderstanding to suit the changing nature of the
phenomenon. The study further brings to light a series
of changes brought about to the suburb by theoccurrence of gentriﬁcation, such as the decrease in
housing affordability, growth of retail and business,
and growth of urban amenities, ultimately resulting inits urban spatial transformation.
Keywords Gentriﬁcation /C1Urban /C1Suburban /C1
Neighborhood /C1Transformation
Introduction
The process of gentriﬁcation has been widely dis-
cussed and debated in urban literature for the past
couple of decades. Irrespective, of the debates sur-rounding the process, its dynamic nature is unani-
mously acknowledged by scholars. Studies on
gentriﬁcation had mostly been west-centric until adecade ago when the wave of interest in documenting
its occurrence in the global south gained interest
(Ghertner 2014 ). Traditionally associated with inner-
city renewal, it varies depending on the arrangement
of urban-social settings and practices. It has come to
be referred to as the process of renewal and rebuildingof deteriorating urban neighborhoods, accompanying
S. Bhattacharjee ( &)
Department of Geography, University of Mumbai, Kalina,
Santacruz East, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400098, India
e-mail: sujayita100@gmail.com
123GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-019-10067-5 (0123456789().,-volV) ( 01234567 89().,-volV)
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
displacement of poorer residents and the inﬂux of the
afﬂuent class. Although it is traditionally associated
with inner-city areas, in present times’ it is seen tohave ventured into territories beyond the city core. The
phenomenon has ‘mutated over time’ (Lees et al.
2008 ) and is no longer conﬁned to the economic
centers. It has made its mark in the semi-urban and
rural landscapes as well (Venerandi et al. 2016 ).
Today the suburbs are no longer separate from theurban areas; rather they are a part of the continuum.
With the unprecedented expansion of the suburban
realm, the suburban geographies have attained theurban character. Knox and Pinch ( 2010 ) remarked that
the earlier existent difference between suburb and the
city have begun to disappear in present times. In spiteof this, most studies taken upon gentriﬁcation, comply
with the conventional framework concentrating on the
inner-city areas. As seen in case of Mumbai, followingits deindustrialization phase, the gentriﬁcation and
post-industrial transformation of the inner-city neigh-
borhoods, such as Lower Parel, Dadar, Byculla,Elphinstone, and Worli have received much attention
(Chatterjee and Parthasarathy 2018 ; Ghertner 2014 ;
Vidhate and Sharma n.d.). However, there are strongpieces of evidence suggesting the occurrence of
gentriﬁcation, at the suburban level at Mulund that
has not received the much-needed attention itdeserves. As a result, our understanding of the process
of gentriﬁcation occurring in Mumbai is limited.
Taking into account this knowledge gap, an endeavorto understand the process of suburban gentriﬁcation in
Mulund has been taken up.
Accordingly, the study has been based on certain
objectives and associated research questions. The
main objectives are: (1) to explain the occurrence of
suburban gentriﬁcation in the study area, (2) toanalyze the process in the context of the existing
theories of gentriﬁcation, and (3) to comprehend the
changing character of the study area following theoccurrence of gentriﬁcation. The research questions
associated with these objectives, which the study seeks
to address are: (a) what has led to the occurrence of
gentriﬁcation in Mulund; (b) when and how did it start;
(c) how far does the gentriﬁcation of Mulund ﬁt intothe existing theoretical perspective; (d) are the
production-side and consumption-side theories appli-
cable to the context of Mulund; and (e) what are thechanges brought in about by gentriﬁcation to Mulund.A brief review of the existing literature
The coining of the term ‘gentriﬁcation’ is credited to
Ruth Glass, a British sociologist. She used the term to
critically describe the replacement of working-classpeople by ‘a new gentry’ in many London neighbor-
hoods (Glass 1964 ). While describing her observation
of gentriﬁcation, Glass ( 1964 ) states how the degrad-
ing working-class neighborhoods of London had come
to be occupied by the middle-class residents, turning
them into posh residential neighborhoods with arenewed social character. Since then the phenomenon
has come to be deﬁned and redeﬁned by many
scholars. Zukin ( 1989 ) describes gentriﬁcation as the
movement of higher class people into a neighborhood,
leading to the upgrading of property which in turn
leads to increase in market price and tax valuation,thereby driving out the poorer residents. Knox and
Pinch ( 2010 ) have termed it as the renewal and
renovation of degraded inner-city neighborhoodsthrough the inﬂux of middle-class professionals and
the displacement of poorer residents. According to
Clark ( 2005 ), gentriﬁcation leads to a replacement in
the population of land-users by new-users of higher
socioeconomic status than the earlier ones, along with
the transformation of the built environment broughtabout by reinvestment in ﬁxed capital. The multi-
faceted character of gentriﬁcation makes it a complex
phenomenon. It is ‘simultaneously a physical, eco-nomic, social and cultural phenomenon’ (Hamnett
1984 ). The complexity of comprehending the phe-
nomenon of gentriﬁcation has led to the emergence ofdivergent views in literature leading to various
debates. The most acknowledged debate on gentriﬁ-
cation emerged during the late 1970s and early 1980swhen Smith attempted to explain the causal factors of
gentriﬁcations applying supply-side arguments, while
Lee attempted to explain it using demand-side argu-ments (further discussed in the succeeding sections).
Emphasizing on the qualitative variations taking
place in the nature of gentriﬁcation from one decade toanother Hackworth and Smith ( 2001 ) distinguishes
between three waves of the phenomenon. In these
waves, the gradually growing role of the state andlocal government in gentriﬁcation has been depicted.
Furthermore, in the third wave of gentriﬁcation, the
phenomenon has been depicted to have moved beyondthe inner city to urban peripheries and even rural areas
(Aalbers 2018 ). Besides, until recently, gentriﬁcation
123134 GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
was believed to be a phenomenon conﬁned to the
developed world. This scenario, however, has changed
in recent times. In the last two decades, with the shiftin the economic center of gravity from the ‘developed’
north to the ‘developing’ south, gentriﬁcation has
made its way to the global south (Lees 2014 ).
Additionally, Smith’s ( 2002 ) claim on gentriﬁcation
becoming a ‘global urban strategy’ marked the
recognition of the southern turn of the phenomenon(Ghertner 2014 ). The studies carried out by Visser
(2002 ), He ( 2007 ), Harris ( 2008 ), Shin ( 2009 ) and
Lopez-Morales ( 2010 ), on the countries such as South
Korea, China, India, Singapore, Brazil, Mexico, Chile,
and South Africa, conﬁrmed the occurrence of gentri-
ﬁcation in the inner cities of the global South (Lees2014 ; Lemanski 2014 ). Thus, it was not until the 2000s
that gentriﬁcation in the global south received atten-
tion. As a result, much of our understanding ofgentriﬁcation today is based on the studies conducted
on the metropolitan cities of the west such as London
and New York (Smith 1996 ; Butler and Robson 2003 ).
The ﬁndings of these studies have been generalized to
apply elsewhere (Lees 2000 ). Apparently, the urban
spaces of the developed and the developing world arenot alike (Deb 2006 ). They differ a lot in terms of
demographic and socio-economic characteristics.
These differences lend to the differential occurrenceof urban processes worldwide. Thus, the universal
applicability of the ﬁndings derived from the studies
on gentriﬁcation in the metropolitan cities of thedeveloped world has been largely debated. Lemanski
(2014 ) in her work on ‘hybrid gentriﬁcation’ effec-
tively argues on the need for reﬁnement of gentriﬁ-cation theory in the southern context. Smith ( 2008 )
argues that Mumbai and Shanghai are gentrifying at an
enormous rate, way more than the old post-industrialcities of the developed world. It is evident from the
studies carried out by, Kumar ( 2014 ), Doshi ( 2015 ),
and Ghertner ( 2014 ) that the occurrence of gentriﬁca-
tion in Indian cities has been gaining attention in
recent times. Studies that have been undertaken on
gentriﬁcation in Mumbai provide a vivid perspective
on the nature of gentriﬁcation in the inner city areas of
the city. For instance: (a) Banerjee-Guha ( 2011 ) in her
study argues that the urbanization of Mumbai is by and
large a part of the processes of gentriﬁcation and urban
restructuring; (b) Birkinshaw and Harris ( 2009 ) asserts
the process of gentriﬁcation in Mumbai to be state-
driven, i.e. coinciding with the third wave ofgentriﬁcation; and (c) Chatterjee and Parthsarathy’s
(2017 ,2018 ) study throws extensive light on the
occurrence of gentriﬁcation in the old textile mill areasof Mumbai. Nevertheless, considering the fact that
gentriﬁcation in the present times is no longer deﬁned
by its traditional values, further studies on gentriﬁca-tion are required that focus on areas beyond the city
core. Smith ( 1996 ) points out that the suburbs have
been transformed by the same forces of urbanrestructuring that have gentriﬁed the central city.
The occurrence of suburban gentriﬁcation, thus,
cannot be denied in present times. Accordingly, thegentriﬁcation literature has extended to the suburbs
(Hudalah and Adharina 2019 ). The fact that suburbs
often do experience gentriﬁcation is conﬁrmed bymany recent studies (Charles 2011
; Parlette 2012 ;
Hudalah and Adharina 2019 ). However, such studies
are severely lacking in the Indian context.
Methodology
This research paper is an outcome of the research on
gentriﬁcation taken up at Mulund, the north-eastern-most suburb of Mumbai (Fig. 1). The suburb is
surrounded by the city of Thane in the north, the
Sanjay Gandhi National Park in the west, the Thanecreek in the east, Bhandup in the southwest, and
Kanjurmarg in the south. The history of Mulund dates
back to several thousand years. The earliest referenceto Mulund can be found in Mauryan edicts, which
brand this area as Muchchalind, an outpost of the
ancient empire (Living in Mulund n.d). Mul Kund andMangalapuri are the other names that were historically
associated with Mulund. It is said to be the earliest
planned suburb of Mumbai. The suburb railway linepassing through Mulund divides it into two parts,
namely—Mulund East and Mulund West. As per the
2011 census, the total population of Mulund is3,41,463 persons of which 1,02,918 persons reside in
Mulund East and 23,85,45 reside in Mulund West. The
total male population of Mulund is 1,76,156 and the
female population is 1,65,307 (District Census Hand-
book: Mumbai Suburban District 2011 ). Prior to the
deindustrialization phase that hit Mumbai, including
Mulund, during the 1980s and the 1990s the suburb
was not as popular as today. It was only following thedeindustrialization phase that the suburb gained
prominence as ‘the vacated industrial sites began
123GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143 135
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
getting used for residential development’ (Kulshrestha
2018 ).
The data for the study has been collected from both
primary as well as secondary sources. The methods
used for the collection of primary data are ﬁeldobservation, questionnaire survey, and residents’
interview. Field observation was done by personally
visiting the study area and visually observing as wellas keeping a record of the details in the form of notes.
For the questionnaire survey and the residents’
interview, the respondents’ were selected using theconvenience sampling method, mostly targeting the
middle-aged and senior citizens. The reason behind
the choice of convenience sampling is based on thefact that the use of a simple random sample did not
prove to be suitable for the study. Due to accessibility
issues, as well as the unwillingness of many residentsto participate in the survey, the use of convenience
sampling emerged as the best possible option in this
regard. Now considering the fact that conveniencesamples are prone to be non-representative of the
entire population, due care was taken to ensure that no
section of the population based on social and eco-nomic status remained unaddressed. Age-wise the
younger sections of the population were deliberately
left out as per the needs of the study. Targeting tocapture the residents’ experiences related to gentriﬁ-
cation in the study, therefore, necessitated focusing onthe middle-aged and senior citizens having knowledge
of the process. Secondary data, on the other hand, was
collected by means of an extensive review of relevantbooks, reports, journals, and news articles.
Based on a ‘mixed-methods approach’ the study
makes use of both qualitative and quantitative data.Although, considering the nature of the study, the
emphasis has been more on the use of qualitative data.
Nonetheless, quantitative data has been applied whereever felt necessary to support the analysis. To suit the
methodological requirements of the study, the ‘em-
bedded research design’ is used. This design is alsoknown as the nested design or nested approach. It is
speciﬁcally applied in situations where one type of
data, i.e. either qualitative or quantitative is mostcritical to the researcher (Edmonds and Kennedy
2016 ). In case of this study the choice of the
‘embedded research design’ is based on the under-standing that although qualitative data is most impor-
tant for this study, the use of supporting quantitative
data can enrich the study signiﬁcantly. Thus, for thestudy qualitative data was collected on the occurrence
of gentriﬁcation in Mulund and its consonance to the
established theoretical perspective along with on the
Fig. 1 The location map of the study area, showing the location of T—Ward (Mulund) in Mumbai
123136 GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
experiences of the residents’ in the context of the
changing characteristics of the suburb. To support the
qualitative data, quantitative data was collected onmigration, urban changes and changing price trend.
The data thus collected were analyzed and interpreted
to derive the results. The embedded design used for thestudy is depicted below in Fig. 2.
The gentriﬁcation of Mulund
In the 1970s and 1980s, Mulund emerged as an
industrial suburb with many engineering and pharma-
ceutical companies having their factories along its
western half. Fritz ( 1988 ) documented the industrial
lifestyle of the people of Mulund in an article
published in the Rotarian, where he states that the
men often take up more than one job and work doubleshifts, vis-a `-vis, their wives and children take up piece
work to contribute to the family income. The area
along the LBS Road of Mulund functioned as amanufacturing hub with factories lined up on both
sides of the road. Along with it, the ACC Road grew
into a cement manufacturing area. However, with theadvent of the phase of deindustrialization during the
late 1980s and early 1990s, these industrial units
moved out of Mulund. By the late 1990s, the areastarted witnessing a remarkable change that initiated a
phase of transformation, which eventually led it to
evolve as a real-estate hub. Within the span of adecade, Mulund also evolved into a retail hub (Nair
2005 ). The defunct factories and chawls (low-cost
tenements) housing the factory workers, along theLBS and ACC roads attracted builders seeking land inthe already congested Mumbai. Therefore, the facto-
ries and chawls came to be replaced by new malls,
multiplexes, and skyscrapers. In this way, the onceworking-class neighborhood of Mulund West wit-
nessed gentriﬁcation—‘the process by which work-
ing-class residential neighborhoods are rehabilitatedby middle-class homebuyers, landlords and profes-
sional developers’ (Smith 1982 ).
The major housing projects of Mulund that have
come up in the old industrial zone of the LBS Road
and ACC Road are listed in Table 1.
Often displacement is considered as a deﬁning
feature of gentriﬁcation. However, Chatterjee and
Parthasarathy ( 2018 ) have deferred in their views on
the occurrence of displacement, while explaining theprocess of gentriﬁcation in the mill lands in the city
core of Mumbai. They have argued that,
Displacement of the working class by the
afﬂuent class in the inner city area is one of the
main indicators of gentriﬁcation as explained inmuch of the scholarship from the global north. In
Mumbai /C19s mill lands, while there has been
displacement of the mill workers, there is nowholesale displacement or replacement of one
class by another. (Chatterjee and Parthasarathy
2018 )
This raises the questions on what might have
happened to the factory workers of Mulund who used
to reside in the chawls situated along the factories.
Seeking the answer to the question brought into light
an important aspect of the phenomenon in Mulund. As
narrated by Ramesh, a 62 years old former factory
Qualitative data is collected on:
1) Occurrence of gentrification 
2) Its consonance to the established theoretical 
perspective 
3) Experiences of the reside nts’ in context of the 
changing characteristics of the suburb
Quantitative data is collected on:
1) Migration, 
2) Urban changes 
3) Changing of price trendInterpretations 
(Based on the results derived 
from the analysis of 
qualitative and quantitative 
data)
Fig. 2 A schematic representation of the embedded design used in the study
123GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143 137
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
worker of Mulund, who used to reside in one of such
chawl ,
Post-closure of our factory, the company
allowed us to continue our stay in the chawl ,
where many of us stayed, while many others left
for their native places. Thereafter, the builders
who wished to build residential high rises in thelocation of our chawl approached and in
exchange for the chawl they accommodated us
in low budget ﬂats nearby. Some people stayed
in the ﬂats while others sold them at good prices
and with the money, they left for other areas.Presently, on the land where our chawl stood
earlier, stands lavishly build residential high
rises accommodating the afﬂuent class. (Source:Residents’ Interview 2018)
The high maintenance cost and lifestyle change
associated with living in a ﬂat in comparison to achawl room have also been a reason for many to
selling off these ﬂats provided to these former mill
workers. As narrated by, Mohan, a 35 years auto-rickshaw driver and the son of a former factory worker
of Mulund,
We were unable to adjust ourselves in the new
lifestyle. Firstly, we were not accustomed to the
closed-door culture of ﬂats, and secondly, themaintenance cost incurred in the ﬂat was too
high for us. So, we decided to sell it off and
relocated to a chawl room in a nearby slum.
(Source: Residents’ Interview 2018)Thus, not all factory workers and their families
have been displaced from Mulund. However, a
majority of them have left either for their native
places or to areas beyond Greater Mumbai and Thaneto start their lives afresh.
Relating theories of gentriﬁcation to the realities
of Mulund
Considering the debates surrounding the phenomenon
and to comprehend the driving factors of gentriﬁcation
in Mulund properly, an analysis of the process in termsof its existing theoretical explanations is thought to be
meaningful. These debates, according to Cordova
(1991 ) are focused on, ‘‘the shifts in the urban
structure (production) versus shifts in the value
preferences of the baby boom generation (consump-
tion).’’ Thus, the causes of gentriﬁcation are explainedunder two broad categories, namely—the Production-
side theory, and the Consumption-side theory.
The Production-side theory, also known as the
supply-side explanation is based on the classical
theory of economics and it views gentriﬁcation as an
economic process. It attempts to comprehend gentri-ﬁcation in relation ‘‘to the broader spheres of housing
and urban land market’’ (Smith and Williams 1986 ).
Neil Smith’s rent gap theory is a well knownproduction-side explanation of the causes of gentriﬁ-
cation. Smith termed gentriﬁcation to be a structural
product of the land and housing markets. According tohim,Table 1 Major housing projects to have come up in the earlier industrial lands of Mulund
Shut down factories Housing projects Builder Project status
Bombay Oxygen Whispering Towers HDIL Under
construction
Agfa and GABRIEL Runwal Anthurium Runwal Group CompletedChicago Pneumatic Vikash Paradise Vikas Constructions CompletedAsbestos Cement Company City of Joy Nirmal Lifestyle CompletedGlaxoSmithKline (Borrow’s
Wellcome)Eternia; Enigma Oberoi Group Under
construction
Hoechst Marathon Cosmos; Marathon
GalaxyMarathon Group Completed
Lok Everest Cement Company Lok Everest Lok Housing and Constructions
LtdCompleted
123138 GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
‘‘Capital ﬂows where the rate of return is highest,
and the movement of capital to the suburbs,along with the continual devaluing of inner city
capital, eventually produces the rent gap. When
the gap is big, rehabilitation and/or redevelop-ment can begin to challenge the rate of return
available elsewhere, and capital ﬂows back in …
Gentriﬁcation is a ‘back to the city’ movement ofcapital.’’ (Smith 1979 )
The phenomenon of ‘rent gap’ is seen to have
occurred in Mulund, though not in the conventionalsense as deﬁned by Smith. Since Mulund is actually a
suburb and not an inner-city neighborhood, hence, the
idea of the devaluation of inner-city capital cannot beattached to it in the literary sense. Rather, the idea has
to be rephrased as ‘devaluation of local capital’.
Likewise, the notion of ‘back to the city’ movement ofcapital as forwarded by Smith must be rephrased as
‘back to the locality’ movement of capital. Nonethe-
less, considering these aspects, ‘rent gap’ as ‘thedifference between actual rent and potential rent’
(Smith 1996 ) is seen to have operated and beneﬁted
the developers/builders in Mulund. They have pur-chased these rundown properties and constructed
luxurious residences with various amenities and sold
them at good prices earning an excellent proﬁt and
contributing to the occurrence of redevelopment and
gentriﬁcation in the area. However, another importantaspect to be noted in this regard is that after the
shutting down of these factories, not all these obsolete
spaces were immediately sold. In fact, differentfactory plots along the LBS Road were sold at
different times and there are also instances of consid-
erable delay either in launching or completion of theseprojects due to ‘forest land dispute’.
Another popular production-side explanation of the
causes of gentriﬁcation is the value gap theory. Itconcerns with changing property value from privati-
zation, tenure conversion, and change of ownership.
The value gap is said to arise when the value of theproperty is higher under the occupancy of the owner
than under rental. Factors like tax relief for owner-
occupiers, low real interest rates or rent control, leadsto the occurrence of such a scenario. As a result of the
value gap, there arises an economic incentive for
tenure conversion from rental to owner-occupation.This often leads to screening out the low-income
households through the need for initial capitalinvestment to secure the ﬂat, and beneﬁts from
possible rent control are eliminated. Thus, in this
way, it leads to gentriﬁcation. According toMaschaykh ( 2016 ), ‘‘At its starting point, the value
gap theory assumes that private owners of formerly
state-regulated buildings and apartments make themost proﬁt from the transition from state to private
ownership’’. The theory, therefore, applies to build-
ings and apartments formerly regulated by the state.However, in the case of Mulund there is no such
situation of ‘transition from state to private ownership’
(Maschaykh 2016 ), thus, rendering the value gap
theory inapplicable here.
The consumption side theory, also known as the
demand side explanation regards gentriﬁcation as asocio-cultural process. Accordingly, gentriﬁcation is
considered to be driven by social and cultural factors
pertaining to an emerging middle class. According toZukin ( 1987 ), the demand-side explanation indicates
towards consumer preference—for either demo-
graphic or cultural reasons, or for both—for thebuildings and neighborhoods that have become gen-
triﬁed. The consumer preference in terms of Mulund is
revealed from the analysis of the reason for choicecited by the respondents for migrating to Mulund
following the boom of its housing sector, between
years 1991 and 2017 (Fig. 3).
Thus, the process of gentriﬁcation in Mulund can be
considered more or less as a combination of both
demand-side and supply-side mechanisms.
Changing characteristics of Mulund
The occurrence of gentriﬁcation has brought about a
series of changes to Mulund, leading to its urbantransformation. The narratives given by the older
residents bring to light how the suburb has trans-
formed in less than three decades. As narrated byKanjilal, a senior citizen aged 70,
Mulund was like a village in the 1970s and 1980s
with the exception of some factories functioning
in the western part of the suburb. Roads were
non-concretized and dense vegetation engulfedthe suburb. There were no gated neighborhoods
as existent today. It is unimaginable how the
suburb has transformed. Infrastructure wisetoday it is no less than South Mumbai. All kinds
123GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143 139
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
of amenities and facilities are available in the
suburb. However, it is getting crowded gradually
and trafﬁc problems are also increasing. (Source:Residents’ Interview 2018)
In terms of the changes that have taken up in
Mulund following the deindustrialization phase, a
majority of the residents i.e. 39.5% consider infras-
tructural growth, population growth and price rise asthe predominant ones to have taken place in the
suburb.
The impact of the growth in the housing sector
along the gentriﬁed landscape of Mulund has also
percolated to the nearby areas of the suburb. Mulund,
in present times, is mushrooming with real-estate. Ananalysis of the price trends for apartments in Mulund
during the last 10 years reveals the positive nature of
growth of Mulund’s housing market (Fig. 4).
As pointed out by many respondents the afford-
ability of Mulund has worked in its favor to attract a
large number of people choosing to migrate to thesuburb. A comparison of the current average market
prices of residential apartments in various locations of
Mumbai (Fig. 5) brings to light that Mulund is far
more affordable compared to other locations of
Mumbai even today.
An analysis of the migrant population in the sample
group revealed that among those who had migrated to
Mulund from 1991 to 2017, a majority of 47.6%
people had migrated from the other suburb of Mumbaisuch as, Andheri, Ghatkopar, Goregaon, etc., followed
by 28.6% from the Mumbai City District (Fig. 6).
These two categories combined together account for76.2% of the people who have migrated from
completely urban areas. Therefore, the occurrence ofan urban to urban trend of migration is noticed.
The fact that, along with the growth of the housing
sector, there has been signiﬁcant retail and commer-
cial development in Mulund fostering its development
cannot be ignored. The most glaring examples in thisregard are the coming up of two prominent malls,
namely, the R-Mall and the Nirmal Lifestyle along the
LBS Road to mark the beginning of mall culture inMulund. Apart from this many supermarkets and
hypermarkets have come up in the suburb. Mulund
today is a retail hub and has grown in terms of otherbusinesses and service sector establishments as well.
Fig. 3 Pie Chart depicting the reasons behind migrating to
Mulund from 1991 to 2017 ( source : Sample Survey 2018). It
reveals that the majority of the people i.e. 33% moved to
Mulund as they could afford to buy homes here and also localitywise it was a good choice. The reasons cited by the respondents
bring to light the demographic and cultural drivers of
gentriﬁcation in Mulund
Fig. 4 Line graph depicting the price trend of apartments in
Mulund from 2009 to 2018 ( source : computed from the price
statistics available on 99accres.com) It is evident from the line
graph that in the year 2009, the average price of apartments inMulund per sq-ft was merely Rs. 5355. It grew to Rs. 11,050 by
2013, and by 2018 the average price of apartments per sq-ft had
become Rs. 14,280. The suburb has thus evolved into a muchsought after housing destination (99accres.com n.d.)
123140 GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
The coming up of a number of business parks such as
the 360 Degree Business Park, O 2Business Commer-
cial Park, and Ecstacy Business Park have accommo-
dated the emerging ofﬁce spaces in the area. As in the
case of residences, the commercial sector of Mulundhas been boosted by its prevalent lower prices of
commercial property in comparison to other business
hubs of Mumbai.
A comparison of the current average market prices
of commercial ofﬁce space in various locations of
Mumbai (Fig. 7) again brings to light the affordability
of Mulund in comparison to other locations of
Mumbai.
Thus, with the changing characteristics of Mulund,
the emergence of its new urban way of life is evident.Conclusion
The study on Mulund’s gentriﬁcation throws signiﬁ-
cant light on the aspect of suburban gentriﬁcation
taking place in Mulund. The nature of transformation
witnessed by the gentriﬁed geography of Mulund isdramatic and is connected with the ever-growing
space crisis of Mumbai. Push factors such as growing
family size, congested neighborhood, and monetaryconstraints to own a home in the other areas of
Mumbai; along with pull factors such as affordability,
spaciousness, overall livability in Mulund has ledmany people from other areas of Mumbai to come and
settle down in Mulund. Growth of housing, rise in
urban amenities, and improved connectivity hasturned Mulund into a retail hub. With the passage of
time and growing inclusiveness of the suburb, its
dependency on the city core is gradually decreasing.Thus, Mulund is shelving off its suburban character
and embracing ‘urbanism’ into its quintessence,
altering our comprehensions of interaction betweenthe core and periphery.
Acknowledgements I am grateful to my Ph.D. Supervisor Dr.
Sanjukta Sattar for her valuable feedback and suggestions.
Fig. 5 Bar graph depicting the average price of apartments in
various localities of Mumbai during the year 2018 ( source :
computed from the price statistics available on magicbricks.
com). It is clear from the ﬁgure that the gentriﬁed zones of the
inner-city areas exhibit a much higher price in comparison to
Mulund. For instance, in Lower Parel and Dadar, the current
price of apartments on an average is found to be Rs. 31,265/Sq-ftand Rs. 32,099/Sq-ft respectively; whereas in the case of
Mulund it is merely Rs. 16,559/Sq-ft (Magicbricks n.d.)
Fig. 6 Bar graph showing the percentage of people who have
migrated to Mulund from various regions from 1991 to 2017
(source : Sample Survey 2018)
Fig. 7 Bar graph depicting the average price of commercial
ofﬁce space in various localities of Mumbai during the year2018 ( source : computed from the price statistics available on
magicbricks.com ) It is clear from the ﬁgure that the current
prices of commercial ofﬁce space in the original CBD i.e.
Nariman Point and the de-facto CBD, i.e. Bandra Kurla Com-plex (BKC) on an average are Rs. 36,742/Sq-ft and Rs. 32,698/Sq-ft respectively (Magicbricks n.d.). Likewise, in the gentriﬁed
zones of the inner-city areas as well the prices of commercial
ofﬁce spaces are much higher than Mulund. For instance, inlower Parel and Dadar, the current price of commercial ofﬁce
space on an average is found to be Rs. 22,983/Sq-ft and Rs.
37,246/Sq-ft respectively (Magicbricks n.d.). In comparison tothese locations, the average price of ofﬁce space currently inMulund is Rs. 15,807/Sq-ft (Magicbricks n.d.)
123GeoJournal (2021) 86:133–143 141
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The author declares that there is no con-
ﬂict of interest.
Declaration With the intention of maintaining the anonymity
of the residents interviewed, the names of the respondents havebeen changed while quoting from the interviews.
Informed consent All the respondents were informed in
details about the nature of the study and that their participation
was completely voluntary. The questionnaire survey and resi-dents’ interview were carried out only in those cases where theparticipants consented to it willingly. The participants were
given the liberty to not answer any question if they were not
willing to, or even quit the interview in between for whatsoeverreasons.
