Speaking gentrification in the languages of the Global East Author(s): Paul Waley
Source: Urban Studies , Vol. 53, No. 3, Special issue: Locating gentrification in the Global 
East (FEBRUARY 2016), pp. 615-625
Published by: Sage Publications, Ltd.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26151049
 
REFERENCES  
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26151049?seq=1&cid=pdf-
reference#references_tab_contents  
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide 
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and 
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Sage Publications, Ltd.  is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to 
Urban Studies
This content downloaded from 
131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:21:45 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Special issue article: Locating gentrification in the Global East
Urban Studies
2016, Vol. 53(3) 615–625
/C211Urban Studies Journal Limited 2015
Reprints and permissions:sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0042098015615726usj.sagepub.com
Speaking gentrification in the
languages of the Global East
Paul Waley
University of Leeds, UK
Abstract
This commentary sets out to make a claim for gentrification to be understood from the Global
East. I argue that a regional approach to gentrification can nurture a contextually informed buttheoretically connected comparative urbanism, contributing to the comparative urbanist project
by providing an appropriate point of contact between local context and universalising theories. In
the process, I attempt to partially destabilise the concept of gentrification and then re-centre it inthe Global East. Any comparative exercise is not a straightforward process; on the contrary, it is
fraught with epistemological, theoretical and methodological stumbling blocks – regions are slip-
pery and often diverse; diversity can be hard to bottle and label along theoretical lines; methodswork more smoothly in discrete settings. But it is an exercise worth undertaking; the regional is
the middle stratum that allows the locally specific to speak to planetary trends, and planetary
trends to find local purchase. In the pages that follow I map out a number of recognisable typesof gentrification in East Asia. I then use these to transcend the region and cut across the Global
North / Global South binary that bedevils so much theory-making. The aim, addressed specifically
in the final section, is to use these claims for gentrification in the Global East to speak back toand, hopefully, enrich urban theory-making and contribute to discussion of what is becoming
known as planetary gentrification (Lees et al., forthcoming).
Keywords
gentrification, global east, urbanism
Received September 2015; accepted October 2015
A regional perspective on
gentrification
Once again, regions, for all their ambiguities,
have become central conceptual building
blocks in much geographical and related
research (for a summary, see Jones andPaasi, 2013). It is the very ambiguity ofregional definition that allows for the devel-opment of regionalist discourses, the pursuitof elite projects via regional institution-building and the transformation of national
into global capital using regional centres as
staging posts (Ching, 2000). These ambigu-
ities are very much present in the globalregion called Asia-Pacific, Pacific Asia,Pacific Rim or East Asia depending on the
Corresponding author:
Paul Waley, School of Geography, University of Leeds,
University Road, Leeds, LS2 9JT , UK.
Email: p.t.waley@leeds.ac.uk
This content downloaded from 
131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:21:45 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ideological loading one wishes to impart.
Commentators have generally seen this
region as market-infused or state-dominated,
depending on their outlook. If arguing thatit is market infused, they point to family-based Chinese business operating across the
Taiwan Strait and from Singapore, to a his-
tory of Japanese corporate investment inChina and South East Asia, to Korean infra-structure and city-building investments inChina and Cambodia, and so on (Percival
and Waley, 2012; Yeung, 2010). For many
others, the hallmark of the East Asian devel-opment process is the strong (if actuallyquite small) developmental state (Johnson,
1982; Wade, 1990). What is clearer is that,
ironically perhaps in this context, there hasbeen only a hesitant process of regional insti-tution-building, a consequence in part of
Washington’s spoiling tactics and in part of
regional contestation (Beeson, 2007). Chinaand Japan are the main regional protago-nists, and at the same time the principalantagonists.
In this commentary on the papers pub-
lished in this special themed issue, I use the
term Global East to refer to East Asia, how-
ever the boundaries are drawn and embra-cing the porosity of the concept of region.
1
The Global is a marker of theoretical avoir-
dupois, setting East on a par with North.
Global East serves therefore both to re-focusdebate and destabilise preconceptions (Leeset al., 2015b). With its regional focus and itstheoretical load, Global East is intended as a
discursive device designed to calibrate (or
perhaps re-calibrate) the balance betweenthe expertise that comes from area speciali-sation and the engagement with theory with-
out which knowledge will always be partial
and painstakingly incremental. The contex-tualisation that a regional perspective allowsfor ought to be broad enough to lead tocross-fertilisation rather than fossilisation
(Lees et al., 2015a). At the same time, it
needs to guard against producing acontinental exceptionalism that is little bet-ter than country level exceptionalism (Peck,
2015; Pow, 2012).
Looking from the Global East and read-
ing the papers in this special issue, it soon
becomes clear that none of them describes aprocess that conforms to a London or New
York-centred Global North understanding
of gentrification. Many authors specificallyraise this point, and with varying agendas –one actually questioning the relevance of the
concept (Yip and Tran, 2016). However, to
obtain a fuller view of gentrification in theGlobal East it is necessary also to look
beyond the papers in this special issue and
extend discussion and incorporate furtherwork on China and Japan.
The paragraphs that follow will attempt
to do this by building a typology of gentrifi-cation, bearing in mind the importance of a
conceptual structure for meaningful com-
parative work (McMichael, 1990; Peck,2015; Tilly, 1984). A reading of the papers in
this special issue, together with other papers
especially on China and Japan, would sug-gest a four-fold typology of gentrification inEast Asia. The first is what might be called
slash-and-build gentrification, a massive
process of accumulation by dispossession inthe inner city, one that is clearly discernible,
widely evidenced and orchestrated by the
state, a combination of state-led and new-build gentrification (Shin, 2016).
2In
Shanghai and Beijing, state agencies have
overseen the displacement of hundreds of
thousands of people, mainly to the urbanperiphery, to create space for apartment
blocks for the wealthy middle class
(Broudehoux, 2007; He, 2007). This hasoften been a violent process, the violence
sometimes psychological as evidenced for
Guangzhou by Shin (2016). Shin and Kim(2016) identify similar processes in Seoul,where the South Korean state has engi-
neered completely new housing landscapes
designed almost exclusively for the rising616 Urban Studies 53(3)
This content downloaded from 
131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:21:45 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
middle classes. While the primary role is
played by the state, a closely related
property-hungry corporate sector forms an
important accomplice, particularly in Seoul.
The second type involves the selective
conversion of districts with characteristicvernacular housing into chic city quarterswith upmarket restaurants and boutiques.This project of aestheticisation might be
called orientalising gentrification because it
attempts to sell a version of the past usingan aesthetic that, ironically, sometimes harksback to the colonial era. There are numerous
sites of orientalising gentrification in East
Asian cities. Jou, Clark and Chen (2014)write about the gentrification of theYongkang–Qingtian–Wenzhou area of inner
Taipei as ‘commodification of cultural and
historical heritage’, partly abetted by eco-conscious civil society groups. Dihua Streetand its surrounding district in Taipei’s his-torical centre appears to be undergoing a
similar process (Jou et al., 2014; Tan and
Waley, 2006). In Singapore, as Chang (2016)relates, the state has engineered an analo-gous situation where old shophouses in
Little India are preserved and turned over to
artists to be used as studios. The old centreof Hanoi around Nha Tho Street too hasundergone an aestheticised transformation,
but one that perhaps relates more closely to
Singapore’s Chinatown than it does to LittleIndia (Yip and Tran, 2016). In China, theprincipal sites of orientalising gentrification(among many others) include Xintiandi and
Taikang Road in Shanghai and parts of
Beijing around Beihai Park (Broudehoux,2007). Qin Shao’s (2013) moving account ofthe dispossession of a family from its home
to make way for the Xintiandi development
highlights how the state and the corporatesector can act in unison, but often with theinitial key input coming from the state.While Tokyo has figured much less in gentri-
fication debates, a process of orientalising
gentrification can be discerned in many partsof inner city south west Tokyo such asHarajuku and Shibuya. These and similar
neighbourhoods were once mixed commu-
nities. However, during the bubble economyof the 1980s, many residents were driven
out, sometimes violently (Waley, 1997). In
their place came not only housing for theincreasingly prosperous middle classes butalso the boutiques, bijou cafes and bistros
where they could shop and eat.
Both the above two types of gentrification
are likely to affect city blocks and even whole
areas, as for example in inner city Shanghai.Gentrification in East Asian cities, however,
can also be isolated, discrete – a tower block
here, another over there. This tower-blockgentrification, piece-meal and jagged, is read-ily discernible in Japan. Lu ¨tzeler (2008) has
identified gentrification of city centre andwaterfront areas in Tokyo, where he shows aprocess of ‘gradual and spatially isolated
forms of residential displacement’ as a result
of the construction of upmarket condomi-niums in previously industrial areas, often on
the site of displaced factories and yards
(p. 298). Hirayama (2005)’s reference to high-rise gated communities scattered around thecity supports this reading of a gentrification
process in Tokyo, while in Kyoto Fujitsuka
(2005) has described a process of lot by lotgentrification of the traditional kimono-
making quarter of Nishijin in the 1980s. The
case is further strengthened by the work ofSorensen, Okata and Fujii (2010) on the reg-ulatory environment that has precipitated the
construction of high-rise residential towers
throughout Tokyo and other Japanese cities.In Hong Kong, it is also at the scale of the
individual high-rise building, sometimes con-
structed on consolidated lots, that actual orpotential gentrification occurs, as detailed byLa Grange and Pretorius (2016; see also Ley
and Teo, 2014).
Slash-and-build and orientalising gentrifi-
cation are both processes that occur in city
centre and inner city areas. Tower-blockWaley 617
This content downloaded from 
131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:21:45 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
gentrification is likely to follow a similar
locational pattern. But gentrification occurs
too on the edges of East Asian cities, where
the transformation of the environment hasin many places been rapid and violent. In
particular in China, accumulation by dispos-
session and displacement have occurred on amassive scale (Shin, 2013; Webber, 2002).
Farmers have been dispossessed of land and
livelihood in order to realise the utopian fan-tasies of growth-obsessed politicians and
developers who construct all sorts of monu-
ments to urban ambitions (Jiang, 2014).This might be termed rice-paddy gentrifica-
tion, in reference to its location in the paddy
fields that surround many of the major citiesof East Asia.
3The rampant transformation
of urban peripheries occurred at an early
point around Jakarta (Dick and Rimmer,
1998; Firman, 2004; Leisch, 2002). Morerecently, not least thanks to the involvement
of Singapore-based Indonesian companies, a
similar process has been observed aroundPhnom Penh (Percival and Waley, 2012),
Saigon (Douglass and Huang, 2007) and
Hanoi (Monthe ´ard, 2010). Interestingly,
Hudalah, Winarso and Woltjer (2016)
describe a somewhat different form of gen-
trification on the edge of Bandung. Here,low-income residents stand in danger ofbeing deprived of their land rights by the
forces of incoming property developers
allied to civil society groups. The accumula-tion by dispossession characteristic of what I
have called rice-paddy gentrification occurs
not only on the urban edge but also in themarginal spaces that border the North-
South Rail Link in Metro Manila. Here, as
Choi (2016) observes, lack of land rights hasfacilitated and hastened the removal of low-
income residents without formal title.
These types cannot of course be definitive
or all-encompassing. They interpret gentrifi-
cation in spatial terms and, for example,take no explicit account of the motives ofgentrifiers in terms of cultural reproduction
(Wu, Zhang and Waley, forthcoming). The
construction of a typology can only avoid
the accusation of being itself an orientalisinginstrument if it is exploited to inform theproject of comparative urbanism – made towork, that is, alongside and in contrast togentrification processes elsewhere in the
world. It is to this comparative engagement
that we turn now.
Comparing gentrification from
East outwards
The comparative urbanism project has been
criticised for highlighting contextual differ-ence, telling many stories but failing to pro-vide an overarching narrative, a pointcogently made in recent papers by Peck
(2015) and Lo ´pez-Morales (2015). At the
same time, it has struggled to create a centre
of theory making in the South (Roy, 2009).Intra-regional comparative work provides aforum for the extraction of a number of
dynamic elements that can then be deployed
in inter-regional urban comparison. In thissense, the intra-regional inquiry can be usedto provide a structure for inter-regional com-parative work by drawing attention to themodulations which give local shape to state
and capital. This can be related to
McMichael’s (1990) ‘incorporated compari-son’, which seeks to use conceptual threads tomake sense of varying conditions around theworld. Certainly, conceptual footholds ofsome sort are required in order for compara-
tive work to be more than the sum of its parts
(Lo´pez-Morales, 2015; Peck, 2015; Waley,
2012). It also requires a field of inquiry withinwhich the comparative work is conducted.Gentrification fulfils this role well.
This commentary now attempts to under-
take an exercise in comparative urbanism bylooking out from the Global East and fitting
the East Asian experience into a narrative of618 Urban Studies 53(3)
This content downloaded from 
131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:21:45 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
planetary gentrification. The exercise is
necessarily cursory and exploratory. The
slash-and-build gentrification of a city like
Shanghai or Seoul has significant commondenominators with the type of far-reachingpredatory state-led gentrification that
Lo´pez-Morales (2011, 2015) identifies in
Santiago de Chile. It finds echoes too in the
revanchist gentrification of south centralLondon in areas like Elephant and Castleand Lambeth (Hodkinson and Essen, 2015;
Lees, 2014). These forms of new-build gen-
trification speak of the state’s leading role inprecipitating gentrification, in Londonlocked into a strategic alliance with private
capital, in Shanghai occasionally ‘cross-dres-
sing’ as capitalised corporation, in Seoulworking in conjunction with constructioncompanies associated with the country’s
leading corporations (Shin and Kim, 2016).
Orientalising gentrification can be seen as
an instance of worldwide retail gentrificationand tourist gentrification. Similar processes
have been evidenced by writers in variouscities around the world. Zukin (2008), forexample, argues that preservation in parts of
Brooklyn means a commodified consump-
tion of space that excludes residents of longstanding. History can be referenced too(Jacobs, 1992), but sometimes the references
are inverted, as when bars and restaurants
sport fake colonial de ´cor. Orientalising gen-
trification finds a Latin American equivalentin the favela chic that Cummings (2015) seesas an accompaniment to favela tourism and
a harbinger of gentrification. While the state
is involved through its pacification pro-gramme, its role is in no way comparable tothe prominent if divergent state interven-
tions to create Xintiandi in Shanghai and
transform Singapore’s Little India. Theurban aestheticisation process that this typeof gentrification entails can in places – forexample, Lagos and Accra – be transposed
from a neighbourhood to a pan-urban scale,
with an accompanying use of violence toenforce the moral imperative of a clean (readelite-oriented) landscape (Gillespie, 2015). In
Singapore, the state facilitates aestheticisa-
tion; in Accra and Shanghai, it enforces it,whether directly or indirectly via private
developers.
The process of tower-block gentrification
and the human dilemmas and suffering it
can cause are vividly described in AravindAdiga’s novel Last Man in Tower (2011), in
which he tells the story of one man’s struggle
against property developers intent on repla-
cing his cooperative housing with an apart-ment block for Mumbai new money, part of
a process similar to that analysed by Harris
(2008) in his intra-regional comparativework on gentrification in Mumbai andLondon. Not only is tower-block gentrifica-
tion the outcome of a relaxation of state
planning rules, but it is at least in theJapanese context the product of a change in
the housing regime that has seen the state
withdraw from provision and financing(Hirayama, 2007). This is, however, less geo-
graphically focused and less sharply etched
on the urban terrain but nevertheless bearssome similarities to the process of rent-gapcapture by urban developers seen by Lo ´pez-
Morales (2015) as occurring in certain LatinAmerican cities. Tower-block gentrificationthrough the construction of concentrated
swathes of large-scale condominiums is a
primary characteristic of gentrification pro-cesses, especially but not uniquely in NorthAmerican cities like Toronto (Kipfer and
Keil, 2002). In all these cases, state strategies
are apparent; it is the task of a planetarycomparative approach to paint a more
nuanced picture of the state’s involvement
and strategic alliances.
Gentrification on the outskirts of cities is
inevitably path dependent in its develop-ment. This is clear, for example, when relat-ing the rice-paddy gentrification that finds
form in the gated and ‘bundled cities’ that
dot the periphery of Jakarta to the sort ofWaley 619
This content downloaded from 
131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:21:45 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
gentrification that occurs when injections of
capital disrupt former urban-edge apartheid
townships, such as that of Gugulethu as dis-
cussed by Teppo and Millstein (2015).
Different again in the type of gentrification
that they represent are the barrios privados,
the gated complexes, that have sprung uparound Buenos Aires, often in close proxim-
ity to shanty towns (Carroll, 2007; Thuillier,
2005). Comparative work might focus onwho has been or is being dispossessed in
these processes and what the provenance of
the capital being deployed is.
Comparative urbanism is an explicit
attempt to move away from Anglo-American
centred theory (Lemanski, 2014; Robinson,
2011). The space created by the Global East
can be used to sidestep or better to decon-
struct the dominant dualism of Global North
and Global South. Seeing gentrification from
the Global East also blunts the inherentothering of the Global South that the domi-
nant dualism enshrines. Put differently, it
provincialises the script emanating from the
Global North by shrinking it so that it fits
within a busier conceptual space. To place
Seoul alongside London and Jakarta beside
Buenos Aires within a structured framework
forces a train of thought that goes beyond a
facile recognition of difference and under-
takes a search for the place of universals like
social injustice and the exercise of power
(Lees et al., 2015a). In this quest, gentrifica-
tion, as a mid-level theory, helps us seek a
balance between the general and the particu-
lar, and travel beyond obstacles posed by theunique versus universal debate that (perhaps
inevitably) characterises so much work in
social theory.
Comparative gentrification and
the quest for theoretical purchase
What does gentrification in the Global East
tell us about gentrification more generally?How does it inform our understanding and
help us re-theorise gentrification? Should we
indeed amend definitions of gentrification? I
will argue here that there are four constitu-tive elements to gentrification: neighbour-
hood class conversion (referred to by Lees
et al. (2015b: 444) as social cleansing), dis-placement of lower-income residents, theexploitation of rent gaps for profit and the
upgrading of properties and neighbour-
hoods (Clark, 2005; Slater, 2015; Smith,1996). As in the Global North and GlobalSouth, so in the Global East, gentrification
generally adheres to at least three of these
elements. Nevertheless, the dynamic forcesthat destabilise and reconstitute urban
neighbourhoods are not consistent across
global regions, nor even in some cases withinglobal regions.
We can however draw a few approximate
conclusions. First, state-led gentrification ispracticed throughout the Global East (Ley
and Teo, 2014). It is overt in Chinese and
South Korean cities and evident but lessovert in Taipei (Huang, 2015; Jou et al.,2014), while in Japan the state sets the regu-
latory parameters that encourage various
forms of gentrification. Slash-and-build gen-trification is rendered simpler to execute not
only because of the power of the state, but
also because of the frequently sub-standardnature of the housing that is demolished(Shin, 2016). These factors together help to
explain both the greater physical and psy-
chological violence of the process but alsoan apparent greater readiness to accept dis-placement. Secondly, there is a distinctive
culture of property (Ley and Teo, 2014; Shin
and Kim, 2016). Property-hungry capital,often in the form of very large corporations
(including in the construction industry), sees
urban land as a terrain for money-making(Machimura, 1992). In Japan’s bubble years,corporate profits were invested in property.
More recently, the Chinese state has created620 Urban Studies 53(3)
This content downloaded from 
131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:21:45 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
exchange value out of property on a massive
scale. It follows from this that the ownership
of land is of crucial importance. In Chinese
cities, land is owned by the state and eitherallocated or leased out. In Taipei, the state
owns about 40 per cent (Huang, 2015). But
in Japan, land is largely privately owned(often in Tokyo by corporations), and here
the rights of land and property holders are
relatively strong (Sorensen, 2010).
These conclusions highlight two worldwide
processes: the state’s quest for a form of eco-nomic growth impervious to social justice
issues and the empowerment of capital that
sees a profitable berth in land and property.But at the same time, looking from theGlobal North, they might suggest some
paradoxes. If gentrification tends to involve
large-scale, and sometimes quite violent dis-placement, why would it appear that there has
been less resistance? And why has there beenso little discussion and so sparse mention ofgentrification, with the discursive focus on
emancipatory terms such as urban renewal
(Ley and Teo, 2014). Both these paradoxesare apparent only when seen from the Global
North. In the case of the first, a combination
of strong state and weak housing has con-spired to limit resistance to displacement. In
China, protests against land grabs and prop-
erty demolition have been widespread butultimately futile, while in Japan as in Korearesistance has, in the broadest of terms, been
successfully coopted (Shin and Kim, 2016).
At the same time, the obstacles (whether
material or cultural) to onsite upgrading of
vernacular houses, especially in Japan, have
led to a greater degree of acquiescence amongsome occupants to distant relocation however
ostensibly inconvenient and unjust. It is, how-
ever, vital at the very least to bear witness tothe falsity of the paradox, and to chronicle
resistance.
The second paradox can be, if not
explained, at least approached by consideringboth the institutional structure behind the
use of the term and by the term gentrification
itself (Marcuse, 2015). The institutions – the
wealthy centres of ‘learning’ and publishing –are located almost exclusively in the Global
North. Hegemonic theories are inevitably
expressed in the languages of the GlobalNorth (predominantly English). English’s
status as a world language only serves to
reinforce the power of Anglophone theoreti-cal constructs (albeit occasionally translated
from French or German) (Aalbers, 2004; Ley
and Teo, 2014; Paasi, 2005). The power ofcapital that emanates from the Global East
might shift paradigms somewhat, but the lan-
guages of ‘learning’ are likely to remain thoseof the Global North, and this will tend toperpetuate the monocentric terrain of theory-
making unless there is constant vigilance, a
vigilance that can be materialised in the formof working and writing ties among research-
ers from different regional berths. As for the
term itself, gentrification is hard to translateinto language worlds that are distant from
English. In English the term’s very specificity
has enabled it to become a cipher for thedamage inflicted by global processes of
urban change. When translated into lan-
guages like Chinese or Japanese, as Shin(2016) points out, it becomes either quaint orpedantic. If transposed, it is traduced, losing
its critical edge. Merrifield (2013) has pro-
posed the term neo-Haussmannisation,which in some ways better reflects the extent
and violence of the process in many parts of
East Asia, but fails to resolve the problem oftranslation. The paradox, however, is artifi-
cial. As in some other parts of the world, the
term might be absent but the process itdescribes is painfully present.
This commentary has embraced compara-
tive urbanism as a decentring of theory-
making (Lemanski, 2014; Robinson, 2011).
Yet if decentring is total, it leads to incoher-ent fragmentation (Peck, 2015). ByWaley 621
This content downloaded from 
131.252.96.10 on Sun, 26 Jul 2026 03:21:45 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
formulating a regional perspective through
the lens of a Global East, the commentaryhas suggested a way beyond a conceptual
map that is either flat or characterised by
one peak.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the editors of this special
themed issue, and especially Hyun Bang Shin, fortheir comments, which have helped me developand refine the ideas expressed in this commentary.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from anyfunding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Notes
1. The term Global East is just beginning to
make its appearance in the academic litera-ture (Lees et al., 2015a). It is used here quitedifferently from another new coinage, GlobalSouth-East, which is seen by some as a betterarticulated contrast to Global North / West(Peck, 2015). By way of contrast, Roy andOng (2011), as well as other contributors tothe volume they edited, pick up on the web ofpolicy and practice in Asian cities to describea more-or-less Singapore-centred Asianurbanism.
2. Slash-and-build as a term is designed to refer
both to slash-and-burn agriculture with its
image of the clearing of land for crops and
scrap-and-build, the approach to housingseen in Japan, where houses have a short shelflife and are routinely torn down and rebuilt,often using similar materials.
3. The reference here is to McGee’s (1991) con-
cept of desakota , the distinctive peri- and
inter-urban areas of mixed urban and ruralland use and combined household employ-ment that, according to McGee, characteriseEast and South East Asia.
