Through the Looking Glass: Conceptualising
the Theme of Gentri ﬁcation in Contemporary
India
Rituparna Das and Arup Sarkar
Abstract
Gentri ﬁcation, at high levels of granularity, reveals psycho-social, socio-economic and socio-political machinery processes that are
speci ﬁc to particular places. This article critically reviews existing literature to comprehend gentri ﬁcation in the Indian context.
Authors argue that the discord between aspirations and class relations gestates urban informality and suggests a new framework
that the authors call the Triquetra of Informality. The framework proposes that interplay among urban entrepreneurialism, bour-
geois mode of consumption and subaltern mobilisation are the impetus for contemporary urbanism and gentri ﬁcation in India.
Keywords
gentri ﬁcation, India
Introduction
“Change is the only constant ”–The words of Heraclitus ring
true in the twenty- ﬁrst century as we ﬁnd ourselves amid land-
scapes marked by myriad and unceasing constructions, decon-
structions and reconstructions. There is a need to charter new
geographies of theory to decipher the differentiated andrapidly mutating landscapes of urbanisation that are being pro-
duced today (Roy 2005; Chatterjee and Parthasarathy 2018).
There have been a multitude of debates over the trend of trans-portation of western-oriented urban theories and applying them
to explain the urbanism of diverse geographies. The concept of
gentri ﬁcation epitomises this debate. Once a phenomenon
based on quaint and spontaneous changes in the neighbour-
hoods of Euro-American cities, gentri ﬁcation later drew atten-
tion as a global urban regeneration strategy (Lees 2014;Ernesto 2015; Lees, Shin and Morales 2015; Krijnen 2018).
Back in the 1960s, Ruth Glass, a British sociologist,
observed a trend of replacement of a conventional working-class people by a “new gentry ”in many post-war London
neighbourhoods, which prompted her to coin the term “gentri-
ﬁcation ”(Bhattacharjee 2019; Chava, Newman, and Tiwari
2018a; Schmid et al. 2018). Since the 1980s, theories of gen-
triﬁcation have been in ﬂuenced by the neo-Marxist urban
politico-economic philosophy (Bhagya and Prasad 2018;Ren 2018). The two leading frameworks are the Global City
Thesis
1and Neoliberalism.2They emphasise the transforma-
tive effect that the unequal economic relations in the moreextensive world system have on the urban structures and pro-
cesses (Ren 2018). Since the mid-2000s, however, these
frameworks have attracted criticism by post-colonial scholarsproposing a broadening of the research by encompassingalternative theoretical framewor ks or considering multifaceted
place-speci ﬁc attributes while studying the phenomenon in
diverse urban set-ups.
Despite the mounting criticism, challenges in terms of intel-
lectual and geographical divides, and the lack of consensus inacademia on how it should be identi ﬁed, empirically tested,
and contextualised in diverse geographies, “gentri ﬁcation ”con-
tinues to predominate both theoretical and empirical research.“Gentri ﬁcation ”holds merit in its strength in identifying pro-
cesses of urban “class restructuring ”and indirect forms of
market-oriented displacement such as “rent gaps ”(Ghertner
2011a). A considerable scholarship focusing on cities across
the world, such as Beijing, Shanghai (Ren 2018), Santiago
(López Morales 2015), Beirut (Krijnen 2018), Chicago (Ren2018), London (Harris 2008), Mumbai (Fernandes 2004;
Harris 2008; Pethe et al. 2014; Weinstein and Ren 2009),
Cape Town (McFarlane, Silver, and Truelove 2016) andTokyo (Schmid et al. 2018), among others, exempli ﬁes how
urban areas all around the world have experienced differential
traces of gentri ﬁcation.
In the late twentieth century, cities in the Global South have
experienced extraordinary growth, with India as one of the
epicentres of urbanisation (Ren 2018). In the article
Department of Architecture, T own and Regional Planning, Indian Institute of
Engineering Science and T echnology, India
Corresponding Author:
Rituparna Das, Department of Architecture, T own and Regional Planning,
Indian Institute of Engineering Science and T echnology, Howrah, West Bengal711103, India.
Email: dasrituparna20@gmail.comOriginal Article (literature review or lit review with annotated bibliography)
Journal of Planning Literature
1-28© The Author(s) 2021Article reuse guidelines:sagepub.com/journals-permissionsDOI: 10.1177/08854122211052686journals.sagepub.com/home/jpl

titled “Rethinking gentri ﬁcation in India: Displacement, dispos-
session and the spectre of development ”, Doshi (2015) posits
speciﬁc articulations of urban transformation that contest the dis-
course of western idealised gentri ﬁcation in metropolises of the
Global South. Similar lines of thought were conceived by
Ghertner (2014) in “India ’s urban revolution: Geographies of
displacement beyond gentri ﬁcation ”. He questioned the relative
suitability of the “gentri ﬁcation ”as a concept in the Indian
context though not dismissing the existing evidence or probabil-ity of it occurring in Indian landscapes.
Indian cities have followed a different trajectory of urbanism
than their western counterparts, owing to the informal mode ofgovernance (Doshi 2019), precarious land-use regimes (Doshi
2015; Ghertner 2015; Weinstein and Ren 2009), diverse socio-
economic patterns, and distinct class-based management ofurban space (Harris 2008; Ghertner 2015) and developmental
patterns especially attuned to the ideologies and legacies of cul-
tural and religious nationalism (Bhagya and Prasad 2018;Birtchnell 2016; Fernandes 2004; Ghertner 2014, 2015). This
diversity is evident from the broad spectrum of de ﬁnitions to
deﬁne gentri ﬁcation in the Indian context (Table 1).
In line with such observations, scholars have stressed the
need to look beyond the hegemonic discourse of gentri ﬁcation,
towards (1) the complex historical, political and socio-culturalaspects that are not limited to capitalistic ideologies, (2) the
transformations in the peri-urban and outer areas of post-
socialist and post-colonial cities, where aggressive displace-ment is taking place and (3) where non-fully privatised tenure
still endures (Doshi 2015; Ghertner 2014, 2015; Lees, Shin,
and López Morales 2015). They also proposed a broadeningof the research to encompass said aspects, beyond the existing
focus on the most established global cities.
To look into the inevitable rising complexities of changes in
cities, neighbourhoods and communities in the Indian scenario,
and the degrees of adaptability of gentri ﬁcation to explain these
changes, the existing evidence of the phenomenon and itsimpacts need to be re-examined. In general, a literature
review on this phenomenon in India has not been carried out
hitherto. This makes it challenging to analyse the current pro-gress, trends in research and the relevancy of gentri ﬁcation in
real-life scenarios. This article thus calls for a qualitative
inquiry by consolidating current studies undertaken in thisdomain. It aims to comprehend the applicability of gentri ﬁca-
tion as an “agent ”to elucidate the machinery of contemporary
urbanism in India. It addresses the aim through the followingresearch questions:
1. What are the existing and emerging theoretical concepts
that de ﬁne gentri ﬁcation in India?
2. What are the trends and outcomes of gentri ﬁcation in
terms of spatial, social and political gestures?
3. What are the degrees of adaptability of the concept of
gentri ﬁcation to the contemporary Indian scenario?
The review is based on a conceptual framework and serves thedual purpose of assessing the status quo of the research and
exploring future avenues of investigation.Methodology Adopted
Two types of literature were used to inform the process of liter-ature review: (1) guidance resources and (2) published resour-
ces. The guidance resources served the purpose of extractingthe published resources, managing references and analysing
the data while the published resources were the articles to be
reviewed in this essay. Three guidance resources selectedwere (Bethel 2017; Webster and Watson 2002; Wolfswinkel,
Furtmueller, and Wilderom 2013). Integration of the methods
of (Webster and Watson 2002; Wolfswinkel, Furtmueller, andWilderom 2013) was adopted for searching the relevant litera-
ture, integrating the ﬁndings, analysing the literature qualita-
tively and drawing insights. Bethel ’s (2017) video on
YouTube offered useful instruction on systematically managing
the references.Table 1. Summary of the Selected De ﬁnitions, Sorted by Year of
Publication.
Authors Selected de ﬁnitions, sorted by year of publication
Ren (2018) A“global urban strategy ”, as private –public coalitions
eagerly redevelop formerly devalued urban spacesfor higher-income groups, and the process invariablyinvolves demolition, displacement and uprooting of
community life.
Chava, Newman,
and Tiwari(2018a)“A process through which working-class central city
areas change following the in ﬂux of middle classes
and eventually the displacement of working classes ”.
Krijnen (2018) Quoting Ernesto (2015 , 565) states that
“gentri ﬁcation is about socio-spatial inequality,
where ‘an ample array of local factors like
pre-existing social polarisation and state policies ofspatial economic restructuring ’constitute the
‘different corollaries ’of gentri ﬁcation ”.
Waldman (2017) “Local outcome of globalised socio-spatial processes ”.
Rao (2018) “Process of spatial remaking with discriminatory
effects ”.
Chava and
Newman (2016)“A phenomenon of the exclusion of the poor and their
replacement by the af ﬂuent due to housing
inequities is referred to as gentri ﬁcation ”.
Birtchnell (2016) “In the rest of the world cities, gentri ﬁcation drives
architectural development according to neoliberalideals and is a force that creates an absence of strong
belief in any meta narrative, ideology or religion ”.
Doshi 2015 “Rarely used in vernacular speech and academic
writing, which refer instead to slum demolition andresettlement, peri-urban land grabs and state-leddevelopment ”.
Lees (2014) “The process invariably involves demolition,
displacement, and uprooting of community life ”.
Ghertner (2011b) “If gentri ﬁcation is broadly de ﬁned as the
displacement of a lower class from a space into
which a wealthier class is entering (Smith 1996),
then Bhagidari brings about nothing less than the
gentri ﬁcation of spaces of political association once
open to the public now appropriated by the upperclasses ”.2 Journal of Planning Literature
Following the guidelines formulated by Webster and Watson
(2002), the authors de ﬁned the following inclusion and exclu-
sion criteria for the extraction of the published resources forreviewing:
1. Scope –Limited to studies focused on the Indian
scenario.
2. Sources –The peer-reviewed works of suf ﬁcient rele-
vance and acceptability, appearing on Web of Sciencecore collection and Scopus databases, were considered.
3. Keywords –Following the de ﬁned scope, the keywords
chosen were “Gentri ﬁcation ”and “India ”.I tw a s
ensured that they appear at least once in the whole
textual body of each article.
4. Time frame –The works published between the inter-
vals 2000 –2019 were considered, and the search was
conducted between November 16, 2019 and December
20, 2019.
The bibliographic management tool (Endnote X7) following
(Bethel 2017) was used to download, de-duplicate andmanage the output of literature searches. The further ﬁltering
of articles of insuf ﬁcient relevance was done after the perusal
of each of the selected works. Additionally, relevant secondaryarticles beyond the extracted bibliographic database were added
at the later stages through the forward and backwards tracing of
the citation index. The ﬁnal set of selected literature for the
review is represented in Table 2 following Webster and
Watson (2002).
A concept-oriented approach was adopted in this review
using an “iterative coding mechanism ”following the principles
of Wolfswinkel, Furtmueller, and Wilderom (2013). This was
employed to analyse the selected articles, thereby deriving con-cepts, insights and directing future research. The steps are elab-
orated in the next sections.
Iterative Coding Mechanism
At this stage, the authors followed Wolfswinkel, Furtmueller,
and Wilderom ’s (2013) iterative coding procedure to analyse
the excerpts from the literature to derive and categorise sets
of concepts, sub-concepts, outcomes, and insights. Three
stages of coding (open, axial and selective) were engaged toevaluate them. However, the procedures of coding did not
follow a strict sequence. They were executed in an intertwined
(non-sequential) fashion, going back and forth between thepapers.
Open coding. To identify and build a set of concepts based on
the excerpts supported by the selected literature, the “open
coding ”mechanism was engaged. The preliminary analysis
revealed various concepts (Table 2) related to gentri ﬁcation
among which the concepts “urban entrepreneurialism ”(UE),
“bourgeois mode of consumption ”(BMC) and “subaltern
mobilisation ”(SM) appeared repeatedly across studies
(Table 3), accounting for 49, 30 and 21 percent of the literatureunder review, respectively. These were chosen as the key
themes of the review; the reasons for which are elaborated on
in the following section.
Axial coding. Following the identi ﬁcation of the key concepts,
the authors carried out the next step of “axial coding ”to under-
stand if and how the key concepts were distinct from or related
to each other. Through axial coding, the interrelations betweenthe key concepts or between the key concepts and their sub-
concepts were identi ﬁed. The high-order concepts (described
here as the key concepts, encompassing sub-concepts) willeventually represent the main themes or patterns of the studies.
According to the literature review, the “State ”, the
“Middle-class ”and the “Subaltern ”through their aspirations
and individualised interpretations of space were found to play
signiﬁcant roles in de ﬁning and rede ﬁning urban spaces.
Therefore, they were categorised as the “entrepreneurs of
urban space ”. The authors used the term “entrepreneur ”to
emphasise the nature of such initiatives which are oriented
towards the maximisation of bene ﬁts that an urban system
has to offer. The consequences of their cumulative entrepre-
neurial actions, translated in terms of “spatial ”,“social ”and
“political ”
restructuring of Indian landscapes, are discussed in
the Outcomes (Discussion on the Outcomes of the Key
Concepts Section). Therefore, the three aforementioned con-
cepts ( “UE”,“BMC ”, and “SM”) eventually turned into the
“key concepts ”towards explaining the phenomenon under
study. The schematic representation (Figure 2), depicts these
interrelationships.
At this stage, a “concept matrix ”(Table 3) following
Webster and Watson (2002) was employed to cluster the arti-
cles as per the underlying concepts. Through the above analyt-ical steps, the authors were able to address the ﬁrst research
question by abstracting the existing and emerging theoretical
concepts that de ﬁne gentri ﬁcation in the Indian context.
Description of the Key Concepts
The key concepts, UE, BMC and SM are discussed in the fol-
lowing sections.
UE
The concept of “UE”was mobilised by Harvey in 1989 to
explain the shift of urban governance from “managerial ”to
“entrepreneurial ”where urban policies are tailored to drive
cities towards success in the global market (Birtchnell 2016;Chatterjee 2009; Weinstein and Ren 2009). In this review, the
authors draw on the concept of UE to examine the contempo-
rary urban restructuring of India. In the review, “UE”appears
as an umbrella concept encompassing various governing strat-
egies like “neoliberalism ”,“accumulation by dispossession ”,
“gentri ﬁcation ”,“aesthetic governmentality ”,“elite-biased gov-
erning logics and framings ”and others as sub-concepts
(Table 3).Das and Sarkar 3
Table 2. Listing Articles, Sorted by Y ear of Publication.
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomesBhattacharjee
(2019)Mulund, Mumbai, India Quantitative and
qualitativeContextual
factors,
parameters,
outputsExplained and analysed the occurrence of
suburban gentri ﬁcation in the study area1. Gentri ﬁcation leads to a decrease in housing
affordability, growth of retail and business,
and growth of urban amenities in the suburb
of Mulund.
2. Caused involuntary displacement of
inhabitants due to lifestyle changes andcost of living
Doshi (2019) Mumbai, India (2007 and
2018)Quantitative and
qualitativeContextual
factors,outputsAnalysed how differently situated groups
emerge as “environmental subjects ”that
embrace or contest improvementprojects.1. Environmental subjectivity in Mumbai was
inﬂuenced by (1) elite-biased governing
logics and framings, (2) social forcesmediating informal territorial governance
and development and (3) embodied
experiences of environmental inequality,change and dispossession.
2. Middle-class perceptions of “environmental
degradation ”led to the demolition of slums.
Chava, Newman,
and Tiwari(2018a)Bangalore, India (2009 –
2015)Quantitative and
qualitativeParameters,
outputsExamined whether the large-scale in ﬂux of
public and private capital intransit-oriented development (TOD)
resulted in gentri ﬁcation.1. Investment in TODs caused new-build
gentri ﬁcation in the new neighbourhoods.
2. Led to exclusionary displacement, change in
social composition and indirect
displacement of the poor due to priceshadowing accompanied by social exclusionand housing inequalities
Chava, Newman,
and Tiwari(2018b)Yeshwanthpur Industrial
Area Bangalore, India.(2015)Quantitative Parameters,
outputsEvaluated the impact of new build
gentri ﬁcation on transit ridership.1. Gentri ﬁers contributed signi ﬁcantly towards
metro ridership because of the metro ’s high
level of service (LOS).
2. Gentri ﬁcation showed a negative correlation
with bus ridership as gentri ﬁers showed less
preference for the low LOS of the bus
system.
Chatterjee and
Parthasarathy
(2018)
Mumbai, India (2016) Qualitative Contextual
factorsStudied the urban dynamics of the
gentrifying mill lands of Mumbai.1. The gentri ﬁcation of the de-industrialised
mill lands of Mumbai reproduced the space
as a landscape of contrast, contestations,negotiations and aspirations.
2. The redevelopment process led to
“peripheralisation of the working class ”
without completely displacing the marginals.
(continued)
4
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomes
Rao (2018) India Theoretical Contextual
factorsOutputsExamined the social costs of gentri ﬁcation
faced by the slum dwellers through slumimprovement programmes.1. De ﬁned gentri ﬁcation as a “process of
spatial remaking with discriminatoryeffects ”.
2. Slum improving in India underwent a process
of“incremental gentri ﬁcation ”that led to
spatial discrimination.
Ren (2018) India, China Theoretical - Conducted a critical assessment of global
urban studies by examining three
dominant paradigms: the global citythesis, neoliberalism, andpost-colonialism concerning India andChina.1. China has emphasised the dominant role of
the state in shaping urban affairs, which is
unseen in any Western democracy.
2. The scholarship of India emphasised not only
the neoliberal drive for land speculation butalso its contestations.
Butcher and
Maclean (2018)Delhi, Istanbul, La Paz and
Mumbai(Comparative
analysis)Contextual
factorsExamined the role played by women in
identity formation and place-making inthe context of three areas.1. Delhi, Istanbul, La Paz and Mumbai, enabled
the generation of new biographies forwomen as they mediate globalisation,
cultural change, intergenerational
disjunction and economic transformation.
2. Various pull and push factors made women
re-negotiate with shifts in the builtenvironment, mobilities, practices of
home-making and belonging.
Krijnen (2018) Beirut, Lebanon. Theoretical - Examined the applicability of gentri ﬁcation
theory to contexts outside the GlobalNorth, explicitly responding to the work
of (Ghertner 2014, 2015).1. The creation and formation of rent gaps
often yielded urban enclosures andaccumulation by dispossession in the
informal settlements but is not a suf ﬁcient
explanation of gentri ﬁcation.
2. Gentri ﬁcation theory still holds essential to
analyse and understand the many differentfactors and forces that are involved in
processes of urbanisation and urban change
across the globe.
Schmid et al. (2018) T okyo, Hong Kong/
Shenzhen/Dongguan,
Kolkata, Istanbul, Lagos,Paris, Mexico City and LosAngeles.Qualitative
(comparative
analysis)Contextual
factors,
outputsApprehended the general tendencies of
urbanisation and at the same time to
address the speci ﬁcities developing in
each urban territory on a comparativegesture.1. Developed a concept of “popular
urbanisation ”,“plotting urbanism ”,
multi-layered patchwork urbanisation andthe incorporation of urban differences inexplaining the urban dynamics of theconcerned study areas.
2. Advocated a comparative approach to
generate new ideas that challengeheterogeneous urban experiences.
(continued)
5
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomes
Bhagya and Prasad
(2018)New Delhi, India Theoretical Contextual
factorsRevisited Dasgupta ’s work through the lens
of Sassen ’s concept of “global city ”and
Asher Ghertner ’s concept of
“world-class city ”examining
development trajectories of Delhi.1. Neo-liberalism and globalisation are active
forces in contouring of Indian cities into
spaces that are at par with other world
cities.
2. Newer forms of religious nationalisms
underlined traditional and indigenousmodes of resistance to globalisation.
Waldman, Silk,
and Andrews(2017)India Quantitative and
qualitativeContextual
factorsExamined the linkage between
transnational development strategies andgentri ﬁcation in India.1. Real estate agency –Anglo-Indian led to a
bourgeois mode of development throughthe appropriation of colonial sporting
practices and institutions.
2. Such development promoted transnational
gentri ﬁcation.
Derkzen et al.
(2017)Bengaluru, India Quantitative and
qualitativeParameters and
outcomesExamined the status of the well-being of the
urban poor through shifts in ecosystem
services and people ’s responses to these
shifts.1. Lakes in Bangalore were transformed
through privatisation followed by
conversion, pollution followed bydegradation, and restoration followed bygentri ﬁcation.
2. Shifts in ecosystem services impacted the
well-being of the urban poor in the study
area, making them more marginalised.
Bernt (2016) - Theoretical Contextual
factorsCompared to the urban dynamics of
gentri ﬁcation reviewing the approaches
of Ghertner and Morales.1. The author-centric approaches are
insufﬁcient in explaining gentri ﬁcation
research in a diverse geographical context.
2. Constant comparative research is necessary
to achieve new insights through the lens ofthe simultaneous application of divergent
theories.
Brosius and
Schilbach (2016).Delhi and Shanghai Theoretical Contextual
factorsExamined the socio-spatial imperatives of
“in-between spaces ”in the urbanism of
the study areas.1. Conceptualised “in-between spaces ”
as a
concept which are created by thetrans-cultural entanglements of global-city
formation.
2. The socio-spatial fabric of in-between spaces
are disrupted by the subalterns.
(continued)
6
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomes
Dhingra, Singh, and
Chattopadhyay(2016)Rajasthan, India (2011 –
2014)Quantitative and
qualitativeParameters,
outputsDeveloped a micro-level mechanism to
harness the underlying potential oftraditional neighbourhoods of the studyarea; based on community-basedpartnership.1. Scored selected historic neighbourhoods
through Neighbourhood Vitality T ool tofoster sustainability and avoid gentri ﬁcation
in future.
2. Advocated that the ﬁndings can act as a
concise decision support mechanism for
Urban Local Bodies.
Sengupta (2016) Delhi, India Theoretical Contextual
factorsInvestigated the impacts of Commonwealth
Games in the study area using the
concept of “non-place ”and induced
place-based politics that creates them byutilising the concept of “accumulation by
dispossession ”.1. “Non-spaces ”were spatial manifestations of
“accumulation of dispossession ”.
2. “Non-spaces ”were deliberately created to
satisfy the bourgeoisie vision of the cityaided by government and privatedevelopers.
Chava and
Newman (2016)Bengaluru, India Quantitative and
qualitativeParameters,
outputsFormulated a framework for inclusive
housing strategies for equitable andsustainable Transit OrientedDevelopment (TODs).1. Developed a framework (three-level
stakeholder deliberation) for inclusive,sustainable TOD.
2. Inclusionary zoning, Special-Purpose Vehicle
(SPV), Community Bene ﬁt Agreement
(CBA), Special-purpose planning vehicles,innovative ﬁnancing tools, were identi ﬁed as
viable tools to implement affordable housingin TODs.
Banerjee-Guha
(2016)India Theoretical Contextual
factorsExamined the imperatives of neoliberal
urbanism induced by urban policies.1. The phase of neoliberal urban restructuring
in India is characterised by privatisation,liberalisation, gentri ﬁcation decentralisation
of governance, and dispossession of urban
poor.
2. Underlined the need for an understanding of
“the right to the city ”and “social justice ”.
Birtchnell (2016) Mumbai, India, Theoretical Contextual
factors,outputsExamined the mobilities of ideas in the
context of sacred spaces in India andtransnational ﬂows of trends and services.
1. “Vastu compliance ”is a middle-class centric
spiritual belief that is part and parcel of theprivatisation of the urban landscape.
2. It led to the gentri ﬁcation of local sacred
spaces and areas where the homeless or
poor dwells.
(continued)
7
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomes
McFarlane, Silver,
and T ruelove(2016)Mumbai, Delhi and Cape
T own(Comparative
analysis)Contextual
factors,outputsCarried out an “Intra-Urban Comparison ”
(IUC) to understand its degree in theslum areas under the study.1. The access to and the experience of
infrastructure within different parts of thecities under study varied radically throughvarious modes of urban politics.
2. The “city-scale ”view of urban politics
revealed a lesser diversity than an IUC
approach focused on particular contrastingneighbourhoods.
Lees, Shin, and
López Morales
(2015)Global Theoretical
(comparative
analysis)- Offered an analytical case study-oriented
lens to investigate the gentri ﬁcation
beyond the general outcomes of thephenomenon in the Global North.1. Gentri ﬁcation as a process beyond
straightforward deployment of
neo-liberalisation or a Western-orientedideology.
2. Identi ﬁed that political, historical and
cultural contexts of a particular area
strongly in ﬂuenced speci ﬁc conditions for
gentri ﬁcation.
Ghertner (2015) Mumbai, India; Rio and
LuandaTheoretical
(comparative
analysis)Contextual
factorsExamined the feasibility of gentri ﬁcation as
an agent to explain the displacement
trajectories of the concerned cities.1. The generalisation of gentri ﬁcation theory
failed to consider the transformations in
the peri-urban and outer zones ofpost-socialist areas.
2. Areas with diverse land ownership
experienced the most violent displacement;
often overlooked in the gentri ﬁcation
discourse.
Doshi (2015) India Theoretical Contextual
factorsIdenti ﬁed the major forces shaping urban
transformation in India.1. Identi ﬁed “developmental urban policies ”
“informal regimes of urban development ”;
“rise of elite and middle-class power ”;
“subaltern mobilisations ”; and
“displacement politics ”as developmental
forces.
2. “Right to bene ﬁt”over “right to the city ”
emerges as an important concept that gaverise to negotiations between the slumdwellers and the developmental bodies.
Mumbai, India Qualitative Contextual Identi ﬁed contextual factors that impact 1. Urban redevelopment and gentri ﬁcation of
(continued)
8
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomesKongelf et al.
(2015)factors,
outputs“Community Mobilisation ”
implementation in female sex workers.traditional red light areas increased HIV
contamination among the sex workers.
2. Government interventions largely failed to
respond to community needs in avertingcontamination.
Bandewar et al.
(2015)Mumbai, India Qualitative Contextual
factors,parameters,outputsExamined the causes of the unexpected
growth of HIV among sex workersthrough the lens of the rapid urbanisationof Mumbai.1. Gentri ﬁcation and anti-traf ﬁcking efforts
explained an escalation in police raids.
2. These resulted in the dispersal of sex work
with the sex-trade management leading toincreased vulnerability of the sex workers.
Scrase et al. (2015) Anand in Gujarat and
Darjeeling in West BengalTheoretical
comparativeanalysisParameters,
outputsExplored the development and changes
taking place in two distinctive, middletowns of Anand and Darjeeling.1. T owns of Anand and Darjeeling are rapidly
changing under the in ﬂuences of
neo-liberal policies.
2. The towns exhibited new patterns of
“mobility ”in terms of social and spatial
transformations.
López-Morales
(2015)Global South Theoretical - Studied the contextual realities of
gentri ﬁcation in the cities of Global South.1. Gentri ﬁcation in many places of the Global
South is a form of “accumulation by
dispossession ”.
2. Gentri ﬁcation theories serve as an
important model for contemporaryurbanism across the globe provided they are
open to various diverse class-relationship
adaptations.
Ghertner (2014) India Theoretical Contextual
factorsInvestigated the key differences between
the dynamics of socio-spatial change in
Indian cities blurring the hegemony of
extending gentri ﬁcation framework in the
Global South.1. Displacement process in Indian cities is
experienced through three potential
contextual factors “urban revolution ”,
“enclosures ”, and “accumulation by
dispossession ”and not by gentri ﬁcation.
2. Indicated that extra-economic force is alien
to gentri ﬁcation in the West.
Lees (2014) Global South Theoretical Contextual
factors
Discussed the neglected realities of urban
areas of the Global South beyond theWest.1. Even after gentri ﬁcation became globalised,
current understanding is still mainlygrounded in knowledge derived from
Western cities.
(continued)
9
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomes
2. Advocated simultaneous theory
construction to closely study the feasibilityof gentri ﬁcation in understanding the
aggressive capitalist processes of urban
transformations and growing socio-spatialdisparities around the world.
Pethe et al. (2014) Mumbai, India Quantitative Contextual
factors,
outputsInvestigated how informal forces of
development are materialised in the
spatial development plans of the city inconcern.1. Mumbai ’s land use transformation is
subjected to intense political negotiations
among slum dwellers, corporate capitalistclass, politicians and bureaucrats.
2. The spatial development plans are constantly
diverted from the actual ones to conform to
these negotiations.
Anguelovski
and Alier (2014)- Theoretical Contextual
factorsExplored varieties of environmentalism and
their connections by focusing on the
increased visibility of struggles among the
subalterns.1. The reinvestment in green amenities
induced environmental gentri ﬁcation and
displacement of the unprivileged.
2. Environmental inequalities and gentri ﬁcation
were resisted and contested by the poor bya process called “environmentalism of the
poor ”.
Desai and
Loftus (2013)Global South 2004 –06 and
over 2009 –11Qualitative Contextual
factors,outputsSpeculated the relationship between
ﬁnance, slum housing and infrastructural
investments in the global South.1. “Circulation of capital through
infrastructure development ”in the built
environment (slums) acts as a vehicle ofgentri ﬁcation, leading to uneven
development often fuelled by NGOs and
developmental agencies.
2. Such investment resulted in “silent
evictions ”rather than a more visible one.
Desai (2012) Ahmedabad, India (2004 –
11)Qualitative Contextual
factorsExamined slum resettlement and inclusion
politics by analysing the project fromplanning in the late 1990s to the initialstages of of ﬁcial resettlement.1. River-front development project promoted
gentri ﬁcation by harnessing the strategy of
“ﬂexible governing ”.
2. Gentri ﬁcation leads to the seclusion of the
urban poor by uprooting them and
situating them in resettlement housing awayfrom the river front.
Ghertner (2012) Delhi, India 2006 –
2007 Qualitative Contextual
factors,
outputsTheorised the narratives through which
associations of private property owners
in Delhi depict slums as zones of incivilityand “nuisance ”.1. Slums or squatter settlement are
indiscriminately uprooted in the process of
urban upgrading and environmentalcleansing.
(continued)
10
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomes
2. The law of nuisance curtailing previous
modes of “common access ”by
“introducing a fresh geopolitical ordering ”
that “permitted new entrepreneurial and
middle-class groups to exclude the
subalterns from their rights ”.
Ghertner (2011a) Delhi, India Qualitative Contextual
factors,
outputsExamined the differential impact of
Bhagidari scheme (a citizen-state
partnership scheme) on the citizens of
Delhi.1. The Bhagidari scheme has effectively
gentri ﬁed the channels of political
participation, by weakening the informal ties
binding the illegitimate poor to the localstate and thereby leading to large-scale slumdemolitions.
2. Bhagidari gentri ﬁed political spaces once
open to the lower classes by the upper
classes.
Ghertner (2011b) Delhi, India - Contextual
factorsExamined the mechanism through which
the governments of the Third World
mega-cities remodel urban spacesaccording to aesthetic sensibilities toattain the global status.1. De ﬁned “aesthetic governmentality ”as a
concept adopted by the government to
remodel cities.
2. “City beauti ﬁcation ”drives cleansed the
cities of the urban poor.
Weinstein and Ren
(2009)Shanghai, China and
Mumbai, IndiaTheoretical
(comparativeanalysis)Contextual
factorsCompared the changing regimes of housing
rights in the context of the urban renewalthat is currently under way in Shanghaiand Mumbai.1. The inequalities inherent in Shanghai ’s and
Mumbai ’s housing rights regimes often
force residents to employ extra-legalmeasures to ensure their housing security.
2. India ’s contested land and housing reforms
have produced a relatively more protective
–but precarious –regime of housing rights
for low-income residents than China.
Chatterjee (2009) Ahmedabad, India Qualitative Contextual
factors
OutputsInvestigated how open market policies are
implicated in local industrial restructuring
and urban renewal that simultaneouslyutilise place-speci ﬁc ethnocentrism to
exclude and fragment the poor.1. Gentri ﬁcation in the form of industrial
restructuring and urban renewal
re-ordered community life and aggravatedsituations of social unrest in low-incomeneighbourhoods.
2. Muslims faced exclusion due to resettlement
politics with priorities given to the Hindus in
economically weaker section housing.
(continued)
11
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomes
Harris (2008) London and Mumbai
(2002 –2005)Comparative
analysis- Conducted a comparative analysis of the
economic and political restructuring ofLondon and Mumbai induced bygentri ﬁcation.1. Gentri ﬁcation has jumped straight to a
“third wave ”where the state and
developers play a systematic role ’in the
identity formation of Indian cities
2. Unlike its Western counterparts,
gentri ﬁcation takes a violent form in India
carried out through exertion ofextra-economic forces and various forms ofharassment.
Baruah (2007) Ahmedabad, India Qualitative Contextual
factorsExplored the nature of land tenure and
landed property rights in slums in Indiafrom a gender perspective1. Women resisted gentri ﬁcation in both
upgraded and non-upgraded slums bysecuring the tenure of land assets.
2. They claimed the rights to raise their
children in hygienic environments overﬁnancial gains from selling property.
Fernandes (2004) Mumbai, India Qualitative Contextual
factorsStudied the various linkages between
middle-class identity, economic
restructuring and the politics of forgettingunfolding in urban India.1. Conventional pattern of gentri ﬁcation of
Mumbai led to development of upmarket
suburbs.
2. Both middle-class groups and the state
engaged in a “politics of forgetting ”that
displaced the poor and working classes from
such spaces resulting into fragmented
citizenship.
Secondary resources
McFarlane
(2012)Mumbai (2005 –2006) Qualitative Contextual
factors,
outcomesExamined how different relations of
informal and formal practice enable urban
planning, development and politics, andexplored the changing relationshipbetween informality and formality over
time.1. Identi ﬁed“speculation ”,“composition ”, and
“bricolage ”as the three major conceptual
factors de ﬁning changing relations of
informal and formal practices.
2. Informality as practice can serve as a basis
for rethinking not just informality, but
planning itself, in the production of urbanspace in both the Global North and GlobalSouth.
(continued)
12
Table 2. (continued)
Authors Geographical reference Methods Categories Objective Major observations/outcomes
Roy (2005) - - Contextual
factorsFocused on urban informality to highlight
the challenges in policy prescriptions
about dealing with the exceptions to theorder of formal urbanisation.1. Informality, once associated with poor
squatter settlements, is now seen as a
generalised mode of metropolitanurbanisation- important epistemology forplanning.
2. Informality is not a separate sector but
rather a series of transactions that connect
different economies and spaces to oneanother.
Doshi (2015) Mumbai Qualitative Contextual
factors,
outcomesExplored the complex and contradictory
politics of urban transformation in
Mumbai by focusing on the slum residentsevicted by redevelopment projects.1. Mumbai ’s redevelopment entails not
uniform class-based dispossessions but a
process of accumulation by differentiateddisplacement whereby uneven displacementpolitics are central to the social productionof land markets.
2. Though differentiated displacement,
re-developmental processes were furtherpoliticised through inclusive andexclusionary modes of eviction and
market-oriented resettlement that varied
across classes, gender, and ethnicities.
13
Table 3. Concept Matrix Augmented with Underlying Concepts Created by Authors After (Webster and Watson 2002) sorted by year of
publication.
AuthorsKey themes/
concepts Outcomes
UE BMC SMT rends of
gentri ﬁcationRestructuring of the
physical spaceT ransformation of the
social fabricT ransformation of the
political spaces
Bhattacharjee (2019) x x – xx ––
Doshi (2019) x x x –– – –
Chava, Newman, and
Tiwari (2018a)x –– xx x –
Chava, Newman, and
Tiwari (2018b)x –– xx ––
Chatterjee and
Parthasarathy (2018)xx x x x x x
Rao (2018) x –– x – x –
Ren (2018) x x x –– – –
Butcher and MacLean
(2018)x – x –– – –
Krijnen (2018) x x x –– – –
Schmid et al. (2018) x –– – – – –
Bhagya and Prasad
(2018)xx –– – – –
Waldman (2017) x x – xx x –
Derkzen et al. (2017) x x –– xx –
Bernt (2016) –– – – – – –
Brosius and Schilbach
(2016)xx x x x ––
Dhingra, Singh, and
Chattopadhyay (2016)x –– – xx –
Chava and Newman
(2016)–– – – – – –
Banerjee-Guha (2016) x –– – – – –
Birtchnell (2016) – x –– – x –
McFarlane, Silver, and
T ruelove (2016)x – x – xx x
Lees, Shin, and López
Morales (2016)xx –– – – –
Ghertner (2015) x –– – – – –
Doshi (2015) x x x –– – –
Kongelf et al. (2015) – xx –– – –
Bandewar et al. (2015) x –– – – x –
Scrase et al. (2015) x x –– xx –
López Morales (2015) x x – x –– –
Ghertner (2014) x –– x –– –
Lees (2014) –– – x –– –
Pethe et al. (2014) x x x x –– –
Anguelovski and Alier
(2014)xx x x –– –
Desai and Loftus (2013) x x x –– xx
Banerjee-Guha (2013) x – x – xx –
Ghertner (2012) x x x –– xx
Desai (2012) x –– – – x –
Ghertner (2011a) x x – x – xx
Ghertner (2011b) x x –– – x –
Weinstein and Ren
(2009)x –– – – – –
Chatterjee (2009) x –– – – xx
Harris (2008) x x –– – – –
Baruah (2007) x – x –– – –
Fernandes (2004) x x x –– xx
BMC, bourgeoisie mode of consumption; SM, subaltern mobilisation; UE, urban entrepreneurialism.
The volume of the neo-liberal theses that established the cen-
trality of “State ”in the process of gentri ﬁcation is indicative of
the observation being empirically valid for both the cities ofGlobal North and South (Bernt 2016; Desai and Loftus 2013;
Harris 2008; Lees 2014; Ren 2018; Schmid et al. 2018). In
terms of elite-driven interests and withdrawal from socialistvalues, neoliberal policies in the Global South seem to be no
different to those in the First World. However, the urban gover-
nance of the Global South is geared more towards attractingexternal (First World) investment through the adoption of neo-
liberal reforms and structural adjustment (Chatterjee 2009).
With urban areas of both the Global South and North competingin the global market, the evidence drawn from this review is
instructive of Indian cities being no exception to it.
In the light of the above, the following sections attempt to
comprehend the dynamics of entrepreneurial governance in
terms of politico-economic interventions, collaborations with
multi-scalar institutions and diverse socio-political links.
The state as an entrepreneur of space. Approaching from a
neoliberal and post-colonial perspective, scholars identi ﬁed
various neoliberal reforms like “privatisation ”,“liberalisation ”,
“penetration of foreign direct investment at the city level ”,
“decentralisation of governance ”, etc., accompanied with
“extra-economic ”forces that provide the impetus for the entre-
preneurial urbanism in India.
The State ’s prime vision (the construction of a globally com-
petitive India), through its coordination with multi-scalar organi-
sations, such as transnational institutions, private and corporate
sector, NGOs, civil society groups and extra-legal associations,facilitated the following interventions: (1) the commodi ﬁcation
of city development plans and social welfare schemes;
(Banerjee-Guha 2016; Ghertner 2011a; Harris 2008; Petheet al. 2014; Sengupta 2016), (2) privatisation of public sectors
entities (e.g., housing, infrastructure and sacred spaces) (Bernt
2016; Birtchnell 2016; Ghertner 2012), (3) industrial restructur-ing through urban renewal missions (Banerjee-Guha 2013;
Chatterjee 2009), (4) city beauti ﬁcation drives (Desai and
Loftus 2013; Fernandes 2004; Ghertner 2011b), (5) staging ofspecial priority events like the Commonwealth Games (Brosius
and Schilbach 2016; Desai and Loftus 2013; Sengupta 2016),
(6)investments in the Mega-city and Smart Cities programmes,transnational real-estate development, massive infrastructure
projects and super-liberalised enclaves like special economic
zones (Bhattacharjee 2019; Chava, Newman, and Tiwari 2018;Ghertner 2014; Sengupta 2016; Waldman, Silk, and Andrews
2017) and (7) reinvestment in sustainable development plans,
green amenities and environmental sustainability projects(Anguelovski and Alier 2014; Doshi 2019).
Such entrepreneurial activities percolate down to local
levels, through the Urban Local Bodies (MunicipalCorporations, Municipalities) competing to become credit-
worthy by increasing border porosity to foreign business and
investment, transferring public land to the private sector, creat-ing attractive landscapes for ﬁxing foreign capital and serving
the interests of the bourgeois (Chatterjee 2009; Sengupta 2016).Post-colonial scholars argue that the neoliberal mode of gov-
ernance allows for new mechanisms of appropriation of urban
spaces through “accumulation by dispossession ”– a social
process of production of class and space, imposed primarily
through extra-economic forces by the State or select sections
of the society (Ghertner 2014). Such form of dispossessionoperates through: (1) the removal and rehabilitation of the
poor and poor ethnic minorities to oblivion –a process referred
to as “spatial puri ﬁcation ”(Doshi 2019; Fernandes 2004), (2)
“aesthetic governmentality ”– a strategy to develop new
urban aesthetics to attract foreign investment by beauti
ﬁcation
movements achieved through “spatial puri ﬁcation ”(Ghertner
2011b) and (3) a shift of capital from the lower working class
to the higher classes of the society though “informalisation of
unorganised labour forces ”(Banerjee-Guha 2013).
In a more intense form, disposse ssion involves the practice of
“ethno-religious entrepreneurialism ”(Chatterjee 2009). Such
form of dispossession is realised in the inclusion –exclusion
modes of infrastructure production based on religio-political af ﬁl-
iations of the urban poor, referre dt ob yM c F a r l a n e ,S i l v e r ,a n d
Truelove (2016) as the “soft politicisation of basic infrastructure ”.
“Development-directed policing ”enables the forced dispersal of
the vulnerable and dis-empowered groups from their interactive
spaces aiding urban redevelopment and gentri ﬁcation of those
areas (Bandewar et al. 2015; Kongelf et al. 2015).
Two case studies discussed below demonstrate the mecha-
nisms harnessed in the neoliberal mode of governance both atglobal and local levels.
Case studies. Case study 1 –Chatterjee ’s (2009) study showed
that a “Mega City ”vision was adopted by the Ahmedabad
Municipal Corporation (AMC) in 2003 to boost
Ahmedabad ’s image as a world-class place demanded by the
urban elites and foreign investors. The vision was articulated
through industrial restructuring (gradual closing of mills and
informalisation of labour), an urban renewal project called theSabarmati River Front Development Project (SRFD), and city
beauti ﬁcation drives. The SRFD, which was awarded the
“Prime Minister ’s Award for excellence in urban planning
and design ”aimed towards environmental improvement,
social upliftment and urban rejuvenation that would renew
Ahmedabad but at the cost of displacing 40,000 urban poor.Multiple players participated in the project ranging from
global multi-national private investors (Delamore and Owl
Group of Companies, Emaar, Unitech and DLF) to the nationalpublic sector enterprise. Housing and Urban Development
Corporation (HUDCO) ﬁnanced the project, using AMC
lands as a collateral bank guarantee. The combined renewalstrategies like the Mega-city program and the SRFD however,
failed to operationalise alternative livelihood for the 40,000 dis-
placed families from the riverbanks and failed to offer employ-ment opportunities to those previously engaged in the mills.
The reclaimed mill lands were later gentri ﬁed by the rising res-
idential complexes and malls.
Under the drive of urban renewal, the poor of Ahmedabad
continued to face the lashes of exclusion. Renewal processesDas and Sarkar 15
further intensi ﬁed through scrupulous manipulation of “local
ethnocentric politics ”that accumulated bene ﬁts for the elite
by depriving the subalterns in general and poor religious minor-
ity (the Muslims of Ahmedabad) in particular. Local ethnocen-tric politics favoured the displaced poor Hindus by spatially
resettling them in the housing for the economically weaker
section while disregarding the Muslim evicts.
Case study 2 –Neoliberal policies converged with xenopho-
bic constructions of poor ethnic minorities are also prominent inthe studies by McFarlane, Silver, and Truelove (2016).
Employing an Intra-Urban Comparison method, the research
focused on everyday experiences and perceptions of sanitation
across two informal neighbourhoods in Mumbai. “Soft politici-
sation of basic infrastructure ”was adopted to gain political
patronage by unevenly distributing sanitation infrastructures
in Kothwadi (Hindu legal settlement) and Ra ﬁnagar (informal
Muslim settlement). Kothwadi was politically favoured by the
local Hindu centric political leaders providing the dwellers
Figure 1. Flowchart showing the stages of reviewing the literature.16 Journal of Planning Literature
with all the basic infrastructures and maintenance. Ra ﬁnagar,
partly due to its illegality and partly due to its marginal status
as a predominantly Muslim settlement, suffered from infrequentmunicipal cleaning of drains and collection and disposal of
garbage.
The above case studies illustrated how, against the backdrop
of the neoliberal mode of governance, existing social or cultural
cleavages are politicised not only to sharpen the class dividesbetween the upper and lower segments of the society but also
to fragment the poor.
While the above case studies centred around major mega-
cities like Mumbai, Ahmedabad and Delhi, Scrase et al.
(2015) and Dhingra, Singh, and Chattopadhyay (2016) also
showed that historic neighbourhoods and small towns ofIndia like Anand in Gujarat and Darjeeling in West Bengal
are also transforming under the in ﬂuence of neo-liberal policies.
Figure 2. Schemata of the interrelationship between the drawn concepts, sub-concepts on the basis of axial coding.Das and Sarkar 17
BMC
In the Indian context, the “bourgeoisie ”, or the term widely used
in the literature under review, the “middle-class ”, represents a
new cultural class: (1) de ﬁned by practices of consumption
that emerged with the neo-liberal economic policies of 1990s
India (Fernandes 2004) and (2) interpreted as a form of political
agency than an income bracket (Ghertner 2011a); they are aliberal new cultural class with higher education, income and
political in ﬂuence (Derkzen et al. 2017). This section intends
to highlight two major aspects under the umbrella of “BMC ”
as revealed from the review (Table 2): ﬁrstly, the “bourgeois
vision ”and their “idealism ”regarding urban spaces, and sec-
ondly, how their vision and aspirations are embodied in aseries of socio-spatial and political restructuring in India. The
implications will be discussed in the Outcomes (Discussion
on the Outcomes of the Key Concepts Section).
Bourgeois vision. The vision of the bourgeois can be understood
through their own set of social, political and economic interests
such as the desire for world-class amenities, valorisation of
urban lifestyle complied with spiritual satisfaction (Birtchnell2016; Brosius and Schilbach 2016), and urban spaces to be pre-
served for white-collared production and consumption
(Banerjee-Guha 2013; Fernandes 2004). Such middle-classcentric aspirations are articulated through growing hostilities
towards urban poor and poverty in liberalising India. They per-
ceive the destitute as “urban nuisances ”and“threatening in ﬁl-
trators ”(Birtchnell 2016; Fernandes 2004; Ghertner 2012),
informal settlements as hot spots of “environmental degrada-
tion”(Doshi 2019) and informal occupations to be “illegiti-
mate ”. With the aid of the neoliberal State, these emerging
middle-class groups practise the politics of “spatial puri ﬁca-
tion”to cleanse the urban spaces off the destitute, and appropri-
ate them according to their visions. Real estate agents, under the
purview of the State, then convert such aspirations and visions
into saleable commodities. The above instances of bourgeoisaspirations and their collective perception towards the urban
poor have been demonstrated in the case discussed below.
Case study. An ethnographic study undertaken by (Doshi 2019)
showed that between 2015 and 2018, an estimated 5,000 slumstructures located near coastal wetland vegetation throughout
the western and eastern fringes of Mumbai were bulldozed.
The demolitions were prompted by legal actions through“Public Interest Litigations ”(PILs), undertaken by middle-class
residents against the perceived environmental destruction
caused by the slums, eventually resulting in the evictions oftheir inhabitants. However, apartments, malls and other lucra-
tive developments were erected in ﬂagrant violation of zoning
and environmental laws. Such structures were often legalisedex post facto because they hold aesthetic appeal and because
of greater sympathy afforded to middle-class ﬂat owners by
the governing agents –a form of
“environmental gentri ﬁcation ”
nurtured by “elite informality ”. This indicates how urban green-
ing and sustainability projects have become a hotbed of middle-class environmental activism, and punitive state interventions
scapegoating the slum dwellers and pushing for their
displacement.
Meanwhile, this bourgeois perception of the urban poor and
the differential treatment by the State towards the middle-class
and the subalterns have fuelled a sense of pervasive inequalityin Indian society. The following section discusses how such
inequality triggers opposition from the subalterns.
SM
According to the review, the concept of “SM”represents
various movements in the forms of “social justice ”,“environ-
mental justice mobilisation ”and“indigenous modes of resist-
ance”, mounted by the subalterns against bureaucratic
policies, middle-class activism and gentri ﬁcation (Banerjee-
Guha 2016; Doshi 2015; Ren 2018; Sengupta 2016). Such
movements are organised to contest rights to urban spaces
and bene ﬁts and to live a life with dignity (Rao 2018).
Case studies. Case study 1 –Fernandes (2004) revealed how
Mumbai ’s street hawkers, formally organised into unions,
wielded signi ﬁcant political in ﬂuence against the civic organi-
sations constituted by middle-class groups, in the contest over
claims to public space. To negotiate, the BrihanmumbaiMunicipal Corporation of ﬁcially levied daily charges as well
as devised an informal system of unlicensed hawking in
exchange for bribes. To mediate between the hawkers ’unions
and civic organisations, the municipal corporation attempted
to manage claims to public space through the creation of
legal hawking zones. However, this produced signi ﬁcant polit-
ical con ﬂict as both the hawkers ’unions and middle-class
groups contested the plan, through informal negotiations as
well as legal avenues, thus imparting political pressure on themunicipal body.
Case study 2 –Ghertner ’s (2011) ﬁeldwork in Delhi ’s slums
showed that slum inhabitants, when faced with adversity, wereable to ensure “tenure security ”and“service provision ”such as
re-establishing electricity connections after its free service has
been cut, securing “stay orders ”for demolitions from the
courts by convincing the police, or withholding timely
support for a demolition drive by negotiating with the municipal
authorities.
Contrary to the perceptions of subalterns as passive suppli-
cants, the above cases demonstrate their awareness of the
“channels of accessibility ”and “manipulation of political
patronage networks ”that can be exercised to negotiate with
the State.
Discussion on the Outcomes of the Key
Concepts
As a part of the coding mechanism, the various outcomes
centred around “UE”,“BMC ”and“SM”(Table 2) are analysed
and categorised into: (1) trends of gentri ﬁcation (26 percent),
(2) restructuring of the physical spaces (23 percent), (3)18 Journal of Planning Literature
transformation of the social fabric (38 percent) and (4) transfor-
mation of spaces of political association (13 percent) (Table 3).This addresses the second research question. The following sec-
tions elaborate on the outcomes of the derived key concepts.
Trends of Gentri ﬁcation
Combined with globalisation, and converged with cultural and
religious nationalism, the transformative effects of gentri ﬁca-
tion on the built and non-built environment processes are far
more complex and non-linear in the context of contemporary
India (Doshi 2015; Ghertner 2011a; Ren 2018). This isevident in the various de ﬁnitions (Table 1), diverse forms
(Table 4), and spatial proliferation of the phenomenon from
metropolises to small- and medium-sized towns, inner citiesto suburbs, and peri-urban to informal neighbourhoods. Even
though gentri ﬁcation has been strongly associated with the
transformation of the spatial and social fabric, Ghertner ’s
Bhagidari scheme furthers the horizon by introducing “gentri ﬁ-
cation of political channels ”in the discourse (elaborated later in
Transformation of Spaces of Political Association section).
Transformation of the Social Fabric
The combined in ﬂuence of the UE, BMC and SM has exacer-
bated the existing social inequality in India as suggested by the
literature under review. This is evident in the psycho-social
implications that have emerged repeatedly in the studies, suchas“rising contestations ”,“social relations and power struggles ”,
“hostility to the urban poor ”,“fragmented citizenship ”,“the pol-
itics of mobility ”and“socio-environmental exclusion ”(Table 2).
These reveal that socio-economic inequality in the Indian land-
scape is far more intensi ﬁed than that in the western world (asalso argued by Harris 2008), and how, over time, the rami ﬁca-
tions of this inequality translate into a “process of spatial remak-
ing with discriminatory effects ”(Rao 2018).
Restructuring of the Physical Space
Literature suggests that “spatial remaking with discriminatory
effects ”operates through the appropriation and reconstitution
of space, which emerged as one of the neoliberal mantras ofthe entrepreneur State (highlighted previously in UE). The
resultant variegated consumptive landscapes for ﬁxing capital
have been interpreted by scholars through various nomencla-tures (Table 5). Instances of such landscapes are found in the
inner-city transformations, through new-build gentri ﬁcation in
the transit-oriented neighbourhoods (Chava, Newman, andTiwari 2018a), urban renewal of old working-class neighbour-
hoods to lucrative sprawling developments (Harris 2008), the
gentri ﬁcation of riverfront developments (Chatterjee 2009;
Desai 2012), and redevelopment and gentri ﬁcation of the
urban slums (Bhagya and Prasad 2018; Desai and Loftus
2013; Pethe et al. 2014; Ren 2018; Schmid et al. 2018).
Such landscapes tend to occur not just in inner-city areas but
also in the peri-urban and the urban-rural transitional zone, and
even in the small developing towns. Bhattacharjee ’s (2019)
work on the suburbs of Mulund and Bandra, Dhingra, Singh,
and Chattopadhyay ’s (2016) work on the historic towns of
Rajasthan, and Scrase et al. ’s (2015) research on Anand in
Gujarat and Darjeeling in West Bengal are notable examples.
Transformation of Spaces of Political Association
The links between spatial politics and gentri ﬁcation have been
explored in various studies. McFarlane, Silver, and TrueloveTable 4. Shows the various Forms of Gentri ﬁcation That are Occurring in the Indian Landscape.
Types of
gentri ﬁcation De ﬁnition Spatial concentration Study
Suburban
gentri ﬁcationWhere the occurrence of gentri ﬁcation has percolated from
the inner-city neighbourhoods to the suburbs, leading to adecrease in housing affordability, growth of retail andbusiness, and growth of urban amenities in the suburbs.Suburbs Bhattacharjee (2019)
Environmental
gentri ﬁcationDisplacement of vulnerable driven by bourgeoisie ethos of
urban sustainability and green living and exercised byenvironmental governing regimes in Indian citiesInner-city
neighbourhoods andslumsDoshi (2015, 2019)
Incremental
gentri ﬁcationSlum improvement in India organised by NGOs through their
philanthropic investments leads the recognition and
formalisation of slums eventually leading to a process of
“incremental gentri ﬁcation ”.Inner-city slums Rao (2018)
Marginal
gentri ﬁcationA process that involves the less privileged sections of the
middle classes as “gentri ﬁers”associated with their
valorisation of the urban amenities.Inner-city slums Doshi (2015)
New-build
gentri ﬁcationProliferation of lucrative new developments, where the state
and developers play a systematic role ’in the identity
formation of Indian cities.Inner-city and Suburbs Desai and Loftus (2013) and
Harris (2008)
Transnational
gentri ﬁcationA type of gentri ﬁcation driven by transnational real-estate ﬁrms
leading to a bourgeois mode of development through the
appropriation of colonial sporting practices and institutions.Inner-city Waldman, Silk,
and Andrews (2017)Das and Sarkar 19
(2016) and Chatterjee (2009) (discussed previously) showed
how politics over the consumption of space and its bene ﬁts
are played and experienced subjectively based on religious af ﬁl-
iations and political ties.
Ghertner (2012) furthers the discussion by contextualising
“spatial politics ”in the ambit of “class, status and power ”.
His study on the “Bhagidari ”scheme, a citizen-government
partnership program was initially conceived by the Delhi gov-ernment to “promote inclusiveness ”among its citizens. The
scheme was gradually manoeuvred by the “Resident Welfare
Associations ”(RWAs), constituted by the middle-class
groups to establish a parallel system of governance, alongside
electoral politics, exclusive to their demands. The RWAs gen-
triﬁed the channels of political participation, silencing the
voice of the urban poor by weakening their existing political
and cultural ties to the lower-level bureaucracy.
Discussions on the Insights Drawn From the
Analysis
In this section, the authors intend to interpret the signi ﬁcance of
theﬁndings in light of the research questions posed and to
explain any new understanding or insights that emerged as a
result of the analysis.
Status of Gentri ﬁcation Research and its Relevance in
India
Gentri ﬁcation research in India is observed to be relatively new
than that in her Western counterparts –the topic has been exten-
sively covered in Western scholarly writing since the 1970s
(Lees, Shin, and López Morales 2015) and in India seemingly
since 2004 (Fernandes 2004). The calls to transcend the episte-mological boundaries of gentri ﬁcation theories (Ghertner 2014,
2015; Lees 2014; Lees, Shin, and López Morales 2015), and to
rethink gentri ﬁcation in India (Doshi 2015) have made the
authors look into it as a comprehensive research ﬁeld rather
than a single de ﬁned concept.The emergence of new and relevant theoretical concepts
complementary to gentri ﬁcation is indicative of the fact that
gentri ﬁcation may not appear as a broad spontaneous phenom-
enon, but rather as one of the elements of conscious neo-liberal
strategies. The active presence of many other major develop-mental forces at work moulding the landscape of major metro-
politan cities of India prompts one to see the larger picture
where gentri ﬁcation ceases to take the centre stage and its
effects need to be re-evaluated in the light of emerging concepts
and contextual aspects. This is not to say that gentri ﬁcation
loses its relevance. A proper interpretation would be that gentri-ﬁcation, at higher levels of granularity, reveals processes of
psycho-social socio-economic and socio-political machinery
that are very distinct and speci ﬁc to geographies across the
globe. The authors would like to highlight that it is the existing
scholarship on “gentri ﬁcation ”that provided an opportunity to
bring together for analysis, all the players ( “UE”,“BMC ”and
“SM”) involved in the dynamics of urban restructuring in India.
Considered in isolation, each of these three contextual
factors is necessary, but not suf ﬁcient on its own to drive the
trajectory of gentri ﬁcation. The authors delve further and
employ the “selective coding ”mechanism –a procedure to
identify and develop relations between the key concepts. Themechanism was employed to draw further insights eventually
addressing the third and the last research question of this essay.
The Triquetra of Informality
The selective coding suggested that the “triad”(UE, BMC and
SM) constitute a strongly interconnected system that the authors
of this article entitle “Triquetra of Informality ”(TOI). Figure 3
depicts this relationship. The “triquetra ”is essentially a repre-
sentation of the “state-space3”, that is the set of all possible con-
ﬁgurations, where each con ﬁguration is a “state”of the spatial
and socio-political con ﬁguration of an urban system. The fol-
lowing sections elaborate on the underlying modalities of con-
struction and functioning of the TOI.Table 5. Various Nomenclatures Adopted by Scholars to Describe the Emergence of Variegated Consumptive Landscapes De ﬁned by the
Entrepreneurs of Space.
Nomenclature Interpretation Study
“Non-place ”“ Capital intensive built environment that experienced ‘super-modernity ’and ‘solitary
contractuality ’. These physical spaces are characterised by technological and physical
surveillance to purge the spaces of the poor ”.Sengupta (2016)
“Urban enclosure ”“ A term historically used to describe the privatisation of public or commonable land into
exclusively owned plots and the concomitant elimination of long-standing use rights to that
land. ”Ghertner (2014)
“Puriﬁed spaces ”“ Puriﬁed spaces of urban renewal in the cities of the global South, like Ahmedabad, Mumbai and
Bangalore, include new airport terminals, glossy malls, IT corridors, skyscrapers, hotels andgated homes developed through global –local partnerships ”.Chatterjee (2009)
“Places in
between ”“T ranscultural entanglements of global-city formation, and situate them in the non European
framework of an ‘Asian ’urbanism ”.Brosius and Schilbach
(2016)
“Zones of
exception ”“Sites of collective action and resistance against this violence. They represent ‘spaces of exception ’
and ‘gray zones ’where the state deploys its power differently and ﬂexibly ”.Roy (2011)20 Journal of Planning Literature
The role of class relations in the TOI. The concept of the “trique-
tra”brings to light the historically deep-rooted socio-economic
and cultural segregation that persists even today between the
two major classes of contemporary Indian society (the middle-class and the subaltern). The politics arising from the “aspira-
tions ”and“contestations ”,t ob e “upwardly-mobile ”, among
the two classes, are found to be marked by their exclusionaryrelationship with each other. The aspirations for the material
beneﬁts offered by modern urban society, while simultaneously
being part of an unequal system, result in differentiated avenuesand unequal resources to achieve those aspirations. This gives
rise to contentions between the two classes (discussed in the
Sections of BMC and SM).
The analysis shows that the current mode of governance
often plays a signi ﬁcant role in the existence of this class-
divide. It has been found that strategies to “raise aspirations ”
and“upgrade urban spaces ”, in contemporary political rhetoric
and interventions, resonate with neoliberal governance. This
insight complements the studies centred on the concept of
“BMC ”that demonstrates the rise of the “new”form of
Indian middle-class, associated with a heightened degree ofconsumption and privilege, which has been supplemented by
the effects of the neoliberal policies conceived by the State.
The recent integration of their aspirations with the globaleconomy has triggered transnational exchanges of many types
(Brosius and Schilbach 2016; Waldman, Silk, and Andrews
2017) which resonates with the ideologies of the “Global City
Thesis ”proposed by Saskia Sassen. The emerging bourgeoisiethus serves as the pipeline for the ﬂow of capital into India,
thereby aiding the State in its neo-liberal vision and establishing
a“patron-client ”symbiosis.
The “contestations ”between the two classes are further
intensi ﬁed through the empowerment of the bourgeois class
by the active support of the State. The State gives them rightsto“self-govern ”for ful ﬁlling their aspirations for instance as
seen in the Delhi Government ’s Bhagidari scheme, conse-
quently creating a potential burden for the subalterns who aremore tightly governed. This signi ﬁes that the existence of
“class divide ”not only creates the relationships depicted in
the “triquetra ”in Figure 3 but also sustains them.
(Conversely, in a state of “egalitarianism ”and the absence of
class-divides, the triquetra would collapse into a singularity rep-
resenting an ideal utopian existence).
In the light of the above observations, the authors posit that
“class restructuring ”, which is at the root of gentri ﬁcation, also
lies at the core of urban informality, causing them to be inextri-cably intertwined in the context of Indian urbanism. However,
gentri ﬁcation has been narrated in terms of class-based neigh-
bourhood succession, which tends to overlook the cross-classconﬂict emerging at local and regional levels captured by the
TOI.
The “state-space ”of the “triquetra ”.The“state-space ”of the “tri-
quetra ”demonstrate two changing con ﬁgurations of the govern-
ing system which attempts to reconcile two contradictory
pressures of globalisation, one capitalist accumulation, and
Figure 3. Schemata of the conceptual framework of “Triquetra of informality ”showing the interrelationship between the major concepts
analysed through selective coding.Das and Sarkar 21
the other promoting inclusive and upward social mobility.
Compounding to this, the existing infrastructure proves inade-
quate in accommodating the ful ﬁlment of the sum-total of aspi-
rations of the continually swelling mega population of India.
Besides, neoliberal reforms discussed in UE section raise the
clause of affordability and accessibility, deepening the groovethat separates the middle-class from the subalterns (Ghertner
2011a). Such reforms create selectively permeable membranes
along the aspiration ful ﬁlment pipeline which ﬁlter out a major
portion of aspirations. “Urban informality ”has its genesis in the
various modalities of informal production and consumption
(manifest in varying degrees in UE, BMC and SM) of extra-institutional efforts, avenues, and methods, towards the ful ﬁl-
ment of those aspirations which cannot be accomplished by
formal means. Indeed, the “informal ”paradigm has become
so ingrained in life quotidian that epithets such as “jugaad ”
4
and“jugadu ”have become colloquialisms of urban jargon as
a testament to its ubiquity.
Informality, in the context of the reviewed articles, has been
interpreted in three ways: (1) in the form of myriad territorial
formations with informal settlements (e.g., squatter settlements,regularised slums, resettlement colonies and unauthorised sub-
divisions) (Doshi 2015; Ghertner 2011a; McFarlane, Silver, and
Truelove 2016; Rao 2018), (2) categories of particular classesor groups (e.g., informal labours, street hawkers, menial
workers, tribals and out-castes) and (3) a set of practices
(mode of governance, source of economy generation andmodes of interactions) (Doshi 2015, 2019; Ghertner 2015;
McFarlane, Silver, and Truelove 2016). As Roy (2005)
posits, Indian cities are landscapes where the continuum offormal and informal is regularly punctured to facilitate
various modes of production and consumption of urban
spaces and services. This is also echoed in the works of(Brosius and Schilbach 2016; Sengupta 2016).
Given such a mosaic, the following sections elaborate on the
underlying modalities of functioning of the TOI. Figures 4 and5 show the congruency of the previously mentioned case
studies with the framework of TOI to demonstrate its relevance
and applicability to real-world scenarios.
Informality as a mode of governance. The dual agenda of
capitalistic accumulation and ensuring a robust political standgives rise to “informality ”, which the entrepreneur State later
wields as a tool in metropolitan planning. It is the framework
of informality that enables the State to construct and reconstructcategories of legitimacy and illegitimacy –a mode of “ﬂexible
governing ”(Desai and Loftus 2013: quoting Roy 2005). It does
so by playing the role of a “mediator ”yielding to informal
“negotiations ”by unevenly and inconsistently distributing
rights to the middle-class and the subalterns. Evidence of
such informal governing regimes has already been found inthe previously discussed cases. For instance, drawing from
Fernandes ’s (2004) study on Mumbai (previously discussed
in the Section on SM), it was revealed that the State wasoften fragmented and con ﬂicted, as it oscillated between
responding to the organised demands of middle-classcommunities on the one hand and workers ’organisations
such as hawkers ’unions on the other. At another level, the
State actively participated in attempting to produce amiddle-class-based vision of a beauti ﬁed, globalising city in
which signs of poverty can be forgotten in both spatial and
political terms. Similar instances were discussed by (Doshi2019) where “illegal ”high-end developments were erected in
environmentally sensitive areas while criminalising the slum
dwellers for encroaching those same areas. Unlike squatter set-tlements, such forms of “high-end ”informality usually enjoy
the premium infrastructure and guaranteed security of tenure
(Roy 2005).
The TOI offers additional perspectives in the context of the
political landscape. “Vote bank politics ”and the practice of
“parallel system of governance ”have emerged as signi ﬁcant
factors for “informality ”toﬂourish. The politics of the vote
bank is directly related to the very high representation of
slum residents in major Indian cities in municipal electionsand also because the poor in Indian cities vote en masse, they
vastly outnumber the wealthier residents
’voter turnout
(Ghertner 2011a; McFarlane, Silver, and Truelove 2016). It isthrough the vote bank politics that politicians seek to solidify
or expand their electoral base (highlighted previously),
through informal ﬁxing and negotiations with the subalterns.
Through the parallel system of governance, “formal ”systems
are subverted into “informal ”mechanisms to orchestrate capi-
talistic strategies behind the curtains of social inclusiveness,of which Ghertner ’s (2011) study on the Bhagidari scheme is
a pertinent example.
Informality as a mode of selective interaction. The TOI
revealed how middle-class groups play an important role in
sanctioning informal economic activity, regulating space, and
managing localised service provisions that structure the termsof their interactions. Contrary to the bourgeoisie perceptions
about the subalterns, there exist exceptions, where the middle-
class groups allow them to appropriate urban spaces and bene-ﬁts to a certain extent in exchange of services at a low cost
offered by the subalterns. This insight aligns with the ﬁndings
of Mahabir et al. (2016). They argued that the interdependenceof the formal sector and the informal sector in some cases has
positively impacted the country ’s economic development. For
example, the slums in Dharavi employ as many as 70 percentof its residents with current economic output estimates of US
$700 million annually, which is perhaps also one of the
reasons behind the slums of Dharavi thriving juxtaposed tothe high-end developments in Mumbai (Chatterjee and
Parthasarathy 2018; Fernandes 2004).
Informality as an adaptive strategy. Informality can be wit-
nessed as an “adaptive ”strategy when it is so employed by sub-
alterns in response to unful ﬁlled government commitments,
public investments whose bene ﬁts are reaped by the middle-
class. Through informal channels, the subalterns invoke “alter-
native ”,“non-statutory legal ”,“moral ”and“political ”frame-
works to safeguard themselves against the hegemonic scourge
of neoliberalism (Roy 2005). For instance, during slum22 Journal of Planning Literature
redevelopment in Mumbai, the slum-dwellers embraced slum
clearance drives in exchange for a better livelihood as promised
by the developmental bodies (Doshi 2015, 2019) and were
often provided with a de facto formalisation of their informaltenure in the slums (Ghertner 2012; McFarlane, Silver, and
Truelove 2016). Studies showed that “informality ”has
emerged as an avenue for securing “basic infrastructure serv-
ices”in the informal neighbourhoods which are often excluded
due to their illegal status and inadequate urban infrastructure.For instance, in exchange for political support, bureaucrats
and local politicians offered ration cards, extended water and
sanitation services to the slum dwellers.
The Growing Role of Non-State Actors
Till now the review has suggested “UE”,“BMC ”and“SM”as
the central de ﬁning entities. However, the works of Desai and
Loftus (2013) and Doshi (2019) brought to attention a set of
Figure 4. Representation of the Bhagidari scheme (Ghertner 2011a) through the model of “T riquetra of informality ”.Das and Sarkar 23
hidden “non-state ”actors, for example, NGOs and small scale
entrepreneurs of land (class of landlords) in the game. It
revealed how mediations of these intermediaries open new cir-
cuits of capitalistic accumulation leading to gentri ﬁcation in the
informal neighbourhoods.
NGOs through their philanthropic investments bring about
the development of infrastructure and up-gradation of the infor-mal settlements of the urban subalterns (ISUS). With the lures
of the security of a stable tenure, of living in viableenvironments, and, of their rights to defend it, they coax the
subalterns into incrementally investing in the improvement of
the ISUS, resulting in their of ﬁcial recognition and formalisa-
tion. Such cumulative re-investments make the ISUS open tospeculations through the creation of rent-gaps, which the indi-
vidual landlords tap by creating housing shortages, exercising
monopoly privileges over the spaces they controlled. This con-verts slums into housing sub-markets, making them lucrative
objects of acquisition not only for the large-scale developers,
Figure 5. Representation of the case study by Fernandes (2004) through the model of “T riquetra of informality ”.24 Journal of Planning Literature
but also for transnational developers and the State. The studies
by Desai and Loftus (2013) and McFarlane, Silver, and
Truelove (2016) showed that the gentri ﬁcation of the slums
of Mumbai, which housed around 60 percent of Mumbai ’s pop-
ulation in 2011, contributed to the ﬂourishing of the city ’s real
estate market. As a result, the vulnerable slum dwellers are gen-triﬁed by the relatively better off middle-income residents
willing to pay higher rents in those physically upgraded
slums, which according to Doshi (2015) is a form of “marginal
gentri ﬁcation ”.
This is a paradoxical situation in which efforts to improve
the conditions of the destitute place them in a state of “zugz-
wang
5”where their conditions worsen progressively instead,
reeling under the threat of high rents, tenure insecurity, and dis-
placement pressures, creating what Rao (2018) refers to as“incremental gentri ﬁcation ”. This implies that the TOI is not
necessarily de ﬁned by a direct relationship between its
generic players –it might also be facilitated through intermedi-
aries who act as conduits to reconstitute the TOI between UE,
BMC and SM.
Future Avenues of Research
Acknowledging the progress that has already been made in the
ﬁeld, the review now identi ﬁes certain lacunae and recommends
avenues for future investigation.
1. One of the major gaps in the current research on gentri-
ﬁcation arises due to the constant focus on already well-
documented highly developed urban centres such asDelhi (eight case studies), Mumbai (eleven case studies),
China (four case studies) and major European cities.
Therefore, it is not possible to get a complete picture ofthe impacts of gentri ﬁcation on Indian urbanism simply
by relying on these existing studies. Existing evidence
shows early cycles of gentri ﬁcation, in the rapidly
growing small- and medium-sized cities. According to
Doshi (2015), these small developing centres often have
less capacity to attract government-aided funds for devel-opment. Hence, an understanding of the transformations
exacerbated through forces that are not inherently or
directly induced by the interventions of the State, forexample, changes in the life-course and practices of con-
sumption arising out of lifestyle aspirations, employment,
education, and housing is crucial and may provide uniqueinsights.
2. The concepts employed by scholars are mostly veri ﬁed
only at a theoretical level without any clear consensuson how and through which indicators should be mea-
sured or evaluated. The limited number of quantitative
studies (eight) makes it challenging to decide uponmodels or techniques that would be feasible in the anal-
ysis of these new concepts. The lack of accessible and
reliable statistical data poses additional dif ﬁculties in
quantifying such concepts. However, despite the
dearth of empirical models to evaluate the concepts,the studies are suf ﬁciently detailed in themselves to
enable researchers to analyse a host of real-life issues
and future pathways for research. Alternate pathwaysfor analysis like the “Intra-Urban Comparison ”by
Schmid et al. (2018) and McFarlane, Silver, and
Truelove (2016), ﬁnely grained ethnographies as con-
ducted by Chatterjee (2009) and Ghertner (2011,
2015), may be explored while also integrating estab-
lished and locally relevant data, and taking advantageof systematic, comprehensive and balanced research
summaries.
3. Considering that the TOI has been derived from studies
that imparted exclusive focus on the select Indian
metropolises, it may not represent a picture of urban
dynamics in general. However, existing literature men-tions similar instances in diverse parts of the world
where many of the major developmental forces in play
are similar to those in India, which constitute the TOI.While urban informality has emerged as a strong tool
of urban metropolitan planning in most South Asian
cities, it is not necessarily limited to the cities of theglobal South (Roy 2005, 2011). Urban informality is
found to play a signi ﬁcant role in shaping political and
economic outcomes even in the presence of “strong ”
States and organised “land regimes ”in the Global
North (Doshi 2015; McFarlane 2012). The proliferation
of“accumulation by dispossession ”has resulted in
exploitation and struggle across geographies (Doshi
2015), for example, accumulation through land and
housing speculation has played a crucial role in thedevelopment and spread of the most recent ﬁnancial
crisis in the poorest settlements of the Global South in
the same way as it has in the ﬁnancial heartlands of
the Global North. Cases revealed how slums displace-
ments triggered by speculation have been a signi ﬁcant
part of the urbanisation process actuated by legacies ofcolonialism, racial and class stigma, and state violence
from Manila to Johannesburg to Santiago de Chile to
Brazil (Lees, Shin, and López Morales 2015) andMumbai (Harris 2008). While urban informality has
been integral in the complex adaptive assemblage of
aspirations, negotiations, contestations of the marginalsin Mumbai ’s slums, Doshi (2019) drew a similar
picture, demonstrating how the poor in the informal set-
tlements in Latin American cities negotiated for state
provision of temporary tenure security and services in
exchange for en-masse vote delivery. Taking these per-
spectives into account, future research might adopt theframework of TOI to test its implications and relevance
across the broader Indian context and in the global
scenario.
4. The concepts UE, BMC and SM re ﬂect a striking aspect
of modern India. The authors speculate that gentri ﬁca-
tion and urban informality piggyback on the aspirationsof the population of the society. With everyone trying to
be upwardly mobile, the insights revealed differentiatedDas and Sarkar 25
modes of production and consumption of informality
across the social classes that revolves around an axis
of aspirations, con ﬂicts and negotiations. The assem-
blage of aspirations, con ﬂicts, and negotiations consti-
tute a “ladder of social mobilisation ”through which
the subalterns attempt to become the new middleclass. Thus, it is important to engage with the subjective
experiences of modern urban life, which go into the
making of urban informality and spatially manifest asgentri ﬁcation in future research.
Conclusion
The review showed that gentri ﬁcation studies are becoming
much more differentiated, polymorphic and multi-scalar –the
extensive range of de ﬁnitions, the various outcomes of the con-
cepts –“UE”,“BMC ”,“SM”, and the “TOI”are evidence to it.
The purpose of the exclusive focus on Indian case studies was
to embark on research that aims to theorise Indian urbanism inits own right. Hence, the authors emphasised the need to focus
on the derived concepts, and their outcomes as complementary
rather than comprehensive while conducting future investiga-tions. It is crucial to understand the underlying mechanisms
of such concepts by recognising and mapping a broad spectrum
of opportunities and challenges that an urban system offers,along with the range of aspirations, negotiations and con ﬂicts
among the existing and emerging stakeholders within the
scene. Urban informality can be one of the lenses through
which one can observe various degrees of these dynamics,
while also remaining attentive to other contextual milieus.
The validity of the conceptual model of TOI was demon-
strated by its capacity to represent existing real-world case
studies, without compromising on details to obtain a perfectﬁt. It makes possible an understanding of the various modalities
of operation of the geographical, historical, and culture-speci ﬁc
socio-political entities, and how they shape the society. Thesimultaneous existence of contradictory “states ”of an urban
system suggests that one travel “through the looking glass ”
6
and comprehends both sides of the reality. Therefore, where
do we stand then? Could it be argued that gentri ﬁcation in
India gets its impetus from aspiration, the bulk of which
proves dif ﬁcult to be accomplished through the existing eco-
nomic and socio-political infrastructure and mechanisms and
that informality takes on at times the roles of a lubricant, a cat-
alyst or even an alternative means of ful ﬁlment?
The authors of this article hope that the ﬁndings from this
review may support the progress towards cross-cultural
research for shedding new light on familiar questions in the dis-course of gentri ﬁcation.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the Editor and the Reviewers for their metic-
ulous comments on the manuscript as they laid the scope for furtherimprovement to the ﬁnal acceptance.The authors would also like to thank Abhijit Roy for his invaluable
contribution to critically revising the paper in keeping with the intellec-tual content.
Declaration of Con ﬂicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship
and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iD
Rituparna Das https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1354-3015
Notes
1. The theoretical framework of Global City by Saskia Sassen empha-
sised on the formation of cross-border dynamics through whichcities of the Global North and the growing number of otherglobal cities begin to form strategic transnational networks.
2. Neoliberalism is a political strategy where the State has shifted its
goals from fostering social reproduction to the privatization ofsocial resources, the liberalisation of regulatory frameworks thatmight hinder free market values. Such an ideology enables oppres-sive forces to establish gentri ﬁcation.
3. A “state-space ”is the set of all possible ways of existence of a
system where each different way is a “state”. It is to be noted that
the term “State ”in this article refers to the governing agents and
should not be confused with the concept of “state”and
“state-space ”.
4. The concept of informality takes on local ﬂavours and names
depending on geography. The authors ﬁnd it pertinent to include
the term “jugaad ”and“jugaadu ”in this article to contextualise
“informality ”to the Indian scenario. Originally referring to grass-
roots ingenuity and improvisation towards solving problems ofdaily life, typically though unconventional means, “jugaad ”has
now become a “strategy ”, wielded differentially by social classes
in India for progress in obstructionist environments like inef ﬁcient
governance and inequality (Roy 2011).
5.“Zugzwang ”is a chess term describing a situation faced by a player
whose turn it is to move, where any move made only worsens theposition.
6. The phrase refers to the title of Lewis Carol ’s book in which the pro-
tagonist Alice climbs through a mirror or looking glass into theworld in which everything is reversed. In this context the authorsused this analogy to refer to the contradictory state-spaces createdby the different modalities of interactions between the State, themiddle-class, and the subalterns.
