1  
 
 
PLEASE NOTE  
This is the accepted version of the article, which is available at 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0969776420963381 . 
 
Full reference:  
Tulumello S., Allegretti G. (202 1), “Articulating urban change in Southern Europe. 
Gentrification, touristification and financialisation in Mouraria, Lisbon”, European Urban 
and Regional Studies,  28(2), 111 -132. Doi: 10.1177/0969776420963381 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Articulating urban change in Southern Europe. Gentrification, 
touristification and financialisation in Mouraria, Lisbon  
 
Simone Tulumello (corresponding author)  
Instituto de Ciências Sociais da Universidade de Lisboa  
simone.tulumello@ics.ulisboa.pt  
https:/ /orcid.org/0000 -0002 -6660 -3432  
 
Giovanni Allegretti  
Centre for Social Studies, Coimbra University, Portugal; School of Architecture and 
Planning, University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa  
giovanni.allegretti@ces.uc.pt  
https://orcid.org/0000 -0001 -6234 -5168 
 
Abstract  
The global or planetary reach of gentrification has become a mains tream in critical urban 
studies.  And yet,  the ‘travels’ of a concept originated in specific places and times have often 
brought  about a loss of explanatory and strategic power.  In this article, we argue that  another 
concept, that of articulation developed by Laclau and Mouffe, is particularly adequate to help  
gentrification, touristification and financialisation to travel among places and levels of 
abstraction . In order to  make this argument, we focus on Southern Europe,  whose cities  had 
long been considered scarcely gentrifiable  and where,  more recently, critical urban 
scholarship has made large use ogf gentrificat ion, touristification  and financialisation  to 
3 explain the impacts of crisis, austerity, and afterwards economic rebound driven  by real estate 
and tourism . We explor e in multi -scalar perspective  the trajectory of Mouraria, a historical 
neighbourhood in Lisb on – and particularly the dimensions of housing and local politics . We 
show how Mouraria , during  the last decade, shifted from  being  a ‘deviant’ case – capable of 
taking advantage of neoliberal regeneration policies  in order  to keep  its social diversity an d 
most  of its long-term residents  – toward  one ‘paradigmatic’ of urbanisation -as-accumulation 
and contentious urban politics . We explain this shift by focusing on its multi -scalar 
determinants ; conclud ing that present urban change in many Southern European cities should 
be understood as the articulation of various processes , which  includ e gentrification, 
touristification and financialisation . 
 
Keywords : 
Articulation; u rban regeneration ; neoliberal urban policy;  housing ; public participation; 
social movements . 
 
1. Introduction  
 
In the aftermaths of the global financial crisis and deep  national  austerity policies  – often 
under request of international lenders (Tulumello et al. 2020) –, Sou thern European cities are 
ongoing  turbulent changes: they have become ‘battlegrounds’ (Cocola -Gant 2015) of  
investment, speculation and displacement . Three concepts  generated in other contexts  – 
gentrification, touristification and financialisation – have become linchpins of Southern 
European critical urban studies, often with scarce attentiveness to their contextual 
specificities (see Section 2). In this article, we question the use of these concepts, taking steps 
4 from Thomas Malout as’ critique of the  travel  of concepts that are  ‘highly dependent on 
contextual causality’ (2012: 34) ; and Sequera and Nofre’s argument (2018) against the  
conflation of touristification and gentrification . On the one hand, we will provide further 
evidence of the limits of the concept of gentrification per se  to explain  current processes  in 
Southern European cities. On the other, however, we will argue, contra Sequera and Nofre’s 
suggestion (2018) to ‘de -link’ touristification and gentrification, for an epis temological 
approach based on the study of the  articulation (cf. Laclau and Mouffe 1985) of these  two 
concepts, plus that of financialisation. This approach, we will show , helps  explain ing current 
transformations , increasing the analytical and strategic po wer of the c oncepts of 
gentrification, touristification and financialisation . In doing so, we contribute more widely to 
the development of global urban studies (cf. Robinson 2016), by bringing fresh theoretical 
insights from a context, Southern Europe – and specifically Lisbon – that have long remained  
at the ‘borderlands’ of urban theorisation (Baptista 2013) and can help us further our 
understanding of how concepts travel and are stretched . 
Our epistemological strategy is exploring a case -study in multi -scalar and longitudinal 
perspective . We focus on  the neighbourhood of Mouraria in Lisbon, a city  that has lost almost 
a half of its population since the 1980s , where  regeneration policies have bee n around for 
some three decades , bringing mixed results and, in some neighbourhoods,  displacement (e.g., 
Mendes  2013) . Mouraria has been, since 2007, at the core of urban regeneration efforts by 
the municipality – themselves crucial to the municipal anti -crisis strategy. During the years 
in which Portug al was undergoing crisis and austerity  (circa 20 09-2014) , Mouraria managed 
to take advantage of policies that elsewhere caused  displacement  (see Section 3). As of the 
end of 2019, f our years into the economic recovery of Portugal, the panorama was radicall y 
changed . While austerity wa s said to be over, and Lisbon to be  thriving thanks to tourism and 
5 real estate  (see Section 4 ), Mouraria was experiencing a radical restructuring  of its socio -
spatial  fabric  (see Section 5 ): on the one hand, processes described  by critical urban scholars 
as gentrification , touristification  or ‘touris m gentrification ’; and, on the other, a 
transformation of local politics, with a shift from public participation toward contentious  
politics . 
Keeping our theoretical goals in mind , we question the trajectory of change of Mouraria  
– focusing on the intersection between hous ing and local politics – looking at two periods 
that we characterise as the ‘crisis’ (2008 -2014) and ‘post -crisis’ (2015 -2019 ). Our 
methodological approach is longitudinal case study analysis : we focus on two periods close  
in time to foreground the factors  of change – see Tulumello (2016a) on how this strategy  
allows  to ‘control’  for the context, allowing  theoris ation  on multi -scalar  causal determinants . 
Following Flyvbjerg’s insights (2006) on case selection , we will show how Mouraria has 
changed from bein g a ‘deviant’ to a ‘paradigmatic’ case. Deviant cases, where outputs of 
processes are different from those expected, are particularly useful to problematise grand 
theories: Mouraria, up until 2014, was deviant because  regeneration policies did not produce 
the same pattern s of gentrification described  in other neighbourhoods  of Lisbon . 
Paradigmatic cases, instead , ‘highlight  more general characteristics of the societies in 
question’ (Flyvbjerg 2006: 232): we will show how Mouraria has  lately  become paradigma tic 
of wider processes that are transforming cities throughout Southern Europe . 
In operational terms, we take stock of , and repeat,  a study carried out  in Moura ria during 
the ‘crisis’ period (Tulumello 2016b) and  based on Ley and Dobson’s systematisation (2008) 
of the  (spatial, socio -political and policy)  factors capable of halting gentrification. We adopt 
this strategy for three  reasons. First, b y repeating the same exercise for the ‘post -crisis’ period  
and quest ioning why was Mouraria suddenly not capable of resisting external pressures  (see 
6 Section 6) , we focus our attention on  the determinants for such a change.  Second , Ley and 
Dobson’s framework helps  overcom ing the long -held divide among supply and demand 
causes of gentrification (see Hamnett 1991); and , in so doing , opening up to questioning the  
conceptual reach and explanatory power  of the concept in and of itself . Third, this  also allow s 
us to put into the picture the political and institutional dimensions that variegate  global 
processes in local contexts, therefore overcoming the problem, emphasised by Maloutas 
(2012; 2018) , of fetishi sing gentrification and similar process es. 
 
Methodology  
 
Our reconstruction of the ‘crisis’ period  is based  on a previous work  based on  data 
collected until December 2014 (Tulumello 2016b) . That article used case study research  – 
using  evidences from policy document analysis, interviews with policymakers and 
descri ptive statistical analyses (mostly from census data) – to analyse urban regeneration 
policies and  their effects in Mouraria . We integrate Tulumello’s findings with systematic 
literature review (see below).  
We similarly  reconstruct ed the ‘post -crisis’ perio d using  case study research  and 
triangulat ing mixed methods and sources of evidence, collected for ongoing projects  on 
housing and participatory policies  in Mouraria and Lisbon  (see funding details ): 
 
• Descriptive a nalysis of statistic  data to account for real estate and demographic processes. 
A systematic comparison with  data available  for the ‘crisis’ period was impossible.  While 
previous studies could rely on the 2011 national census , the next one will be carried out 
in 2021. Though some data at the civil parish level (sub -municipal) are made available by 
7 the Nat ional Institute for Statistics , the administrative reform approved in 2012 has 
included Mouraria in a wider parish (Santa Maria Maior), which includes several other 
neighbourhoods ( e.g. Baixa, Chiado, Castelo and Alfama).  The real -estate and 
demographic trajectories of the latter  neighbourhood s are quite  different from those of 
Mouraria , as processes described as gentrification and touristification predate those we 
analyse in this article – this being the main  reason that  made Mouraria a ‘deviant case’ as 
of late 2014  (Tulumello  2016b) . Data about the Santa Maria Maior  parish cannot  therefore  
be used as  a proxy for Mouraria . Hence , we employed s tatistical data (collect ed through 
other sources , including reports and grey literature ) that  refer to the area of pre -reform  
parish of Socorro, which roughly corresponds to the perimeter of Mouraria.  
• Media and journalistic sources, and particularly: generalist newspapers (e.g. Público, 
Diário de Notícias, Expresso ) to support the reconstruction of planning and urban 
development; and neighbourhood magazine Rosa Maria  (founded in 2010 by local 
associations, discontinued in 2016 and then relaunched in December 2018) to deepen our 
understanding of the perception of the neighbourhood by local non -profit and social 
entrepreneur sector.  
• Participant observation during mobilisations for the right to the city ,1 useful to 
complement the understanding of political trends a nd community organisation . 
• Finally, we carried out a  systematic literature review2 on scientific texts about Mouraria 
published during the ‘ post-crisis’ period (2015 -2019) . We collected  42 works, 
characterised by a significant internal variety.3 As 21 works  use data collected during the 
‘post -crisis’ period, while 21 use data collected during the ‘crisis’ period only (Table 1),  
 
1 With Habita  – Association for the Right to Housing and to the City ( www.habita.info/ ). 
2 During January  2020, we interrogated Google Scholar, Web of Science and Scopus with terms referring to the 
neighbourhood and its main  public spaces (‘Mouraria’, ‘Intendente’, ‘Martim Moniz’) ; afterward tracking  each 
text’s references and citations on Google Scholar  to look for other relevant work s. 
3 Five languages  (Portuguese, English, French , Spanish  and German) and  several typologies: 20 articles, 1 2 
masters’ dissertations, 1 PhD thesis, 4 book chapters, 1 monograph  and 4 conference papers  
8 we were able to  compare  the two groups of works  to question whether our peers had 
notice d the change s we describe. Beyond carrying o ut a qualitative thematic analysis, we 
performed a text analysis over the titles and keywords of the two groups : findings are 
represented in Figures 1 and 2, which show the network of terms co -occurring in the same 
text (bigger nodes are recurrent words, a nd darker nodes means that the word has 
connections with several other words).  
 
Table 1. Works on Mouraria published between 2015  and 2019  
Based on data from ‘crisis’ period (2008 -2014)  Use data from  ‘post -crisis’ period (2015 -2019 ) 
Bettencourt and Castro 2015  
Carmo and Estevens 2017  
Corte -Real 2015a  
Corte -Real 2016  
Corte -Real and Gomes 2017  
Estevens 2018  
Estevens et al. 2019  
Galhardo 2015  
Galhardo 2019  
Matias 2015  
Mendes, Padilla, and Azevedo 2016  
Menezes 2015  
Menezes 2019  
Oliveira 2015  
Oliveira and Padilla 2017  
Padilla 2015  
Padilla and Gallardo 2015  
Sanchez 2015  
Sanchez 2017  
Silva and Maia 2017  
Xavier and Almeida 2017  Almeida 2016  
Bernardo 2016  
Cardoso  TB 2017  
Corte -Real 2015b  
Ferreira 2016  
Galhardo 2018  
Gomes 2020* 
Hortas 2016  
Krähmer 2017  
Lopes 2017  
Mandoux 2019  
Moya 2019  
Moya and Batista 2016  
Muselaers 2017  
Oliveira 2019  
Pellitero 2017  
Ribeiro 2016  
Santos, Ramalhete, and Soares 2017  
Santos et al. 2016  
Santos et al. 2017  
Viana  2017  
* Included in the review because published ahead of print on 10 January 2019.  
 
 
 
 
9 FIGURES 1 AND 2 ABOUT HERE  
Figure 1: Text analysis over titles and keywords of works on Mouraria  based on data 
from ‘crisis’ period, 2008 -2014 (our elaboration).  
Figure 2. Text analysis over titles and keywords of works on Mouraria that use also  data 
from the ‘post -crisis’ period, 2015 -2019 (our elaboration).  
 
2. From t ravelling  concepts  to articulation  
 
Gentrification is  a ‘travelling concept’  (Maloutas 2018) . Originally developed to explain  
influx of gentries and displacement  of wor king class es in late 20th century  British and North -
American cities , gentrification  has been, in the new century, used  in critical acc ounts of urban 
change worldwide . Some argue it is an inter -contextual, global or planetary, concept (e.g. 
Atkinson and Br idge 2005; Le es et al. 2016) . 
While  its global  nature  was becoming  mainst ream in cri tical urban studies,  Maloutas 
argued  that gentrification  is a typical example of mid -range concept s, which are  ‘highly 
dependent on contextual causality . […]  Looking for gentrification in increasingly varied 
contexts displaces emphasis from causal mechanisms and processes to similarities  in 
outcomes across contexts and leads to a loss of analytical rigour’ ( 2012: 34). Contextual 
problems can be overcome, Maloutas added  (2018 ), only by adopting minimalistic 
definitions  – e.g. the compresence of capital investment, inflow of wealthier groups and 
expulsion of lower classes ( see Clark 2005)  –, therefore glossing over t he social , spatial and 
policy characters that shaped  gentrification in cities like London, Chicago or New York . This 
brings the risk  of falling in to the ‘theoretical banality’ (Maloutas  2018: 255) of concluding 
that, in capitalist societies, wealthier groups have more power to decide where they want to 
10 live. This conclusion, beyond lacking explanatory  power, has scarce strategic use, as it erases  
those contextual characters that have slo wed down, or even halted, gentrification in several 
places , including  Southern European cities  (Maloutas 2018 ). 
Southern Europe is  an interesting case to further this discussion : its cities , where 
gentrification was  once considered to be  marginal or absent  (e.g. Malheir os et al. 2013; 
Tulumello 2016b ), have become central to  critical literature  on gentrification in the  aftermath 
of the economic crisis  and during the following economic rebound  (e.g. Sequera and 
Janoschka 2015; Annunziata and Lees 2016; Alexa ndri, 2018) . Concurrently, once at the 
‘borderlands’ of urban theory (Baptista 2013; Tulumello 2016b), Southern Europe  has 
become  a context of theoretical development . Observing  that t ourism -induced change (above 
all, the flipping of residential into short -term rental units) often had a bigger role than  the 
substituti on of lower for higher classes,  some Southern European scholars have stretch ed the 
concept , suggesting that t ourism  is a new  ‘battleground’ (Cocola -Gant 2016) or stage for 
‘symbolic violen ce’ (Ma nsilla, 2018) of gentrification. In his research in Lisbon, Mendes 
(2017) adopted, and extended,  the concept of  ‘tourism gentrification’ coined by Kevin Fox 
Gotham  in New Orleans  (2005). Mendes define d tourism gentrification as:  
 
the transformation of working -class and historical neighbourhoods of the urban centre into 
places for consumption and tourism, by way of expansion of the functions of amusement, 
leisure and tourist ic rental (including, e.g., holiday and short -term rentals), which progressive ly 
replace the traditional functions of residential housing, long -term rental and proximity retail, 
thus worsening [processes of] displacement and residential segregation, emptying 
neighbourhood of their original populations or making  it impossible to  low-income groups 
access ing housing in those areas (2017: 491; our translation).  
11  
Mendes  further  widen ed gentrification by stripping  Clark’s  definition of the inflow of 
wealthier groups. This simplification has gone hand in hand with the conflation with yet 
another concept, financialisation ( see Mendes and Jara 2018) , already applied in  ‘semi -
peripheral’  Southern European contexts (Rodrigues e t al. 2016) and imported into urban 
studies  during the last decade or so  (see Aalbers 2019 a for a review ). Defined as the use of 
real estate as asset through various financial instruments , financialisation  is a more abstract 
concept tha n gentrification. Scholars  like Loretta Lees and colleagues  (2008) or Aalbers  
(2019 b) have attempted at uniting gentrification and financialisation, by arguing that the 
latter explains  the investment dimension in so -called fourth and fifth waves,4 which deepen ed 
and expand ed gentrification through new instruments (e.g. platform economy).  
These conceptual gesture s have contributed to show  how local  processe s are increasingly 
embedded in  global (financial) flows: Maloutas  himself  and his colleagues  have recently 
suggested  that short -term rental platforms may be making gentrifiable the once ungentrifiable 
Athens (Balampanidis et al. 2019: 14 -15). And yet, conflat ing concepts with such different 
nature ( some  context -bound , some  more abstract) reproduces the problems  previously 
highlighted by Maloutas.  Once stripped of the gentr y, as in touristification and urban change  
driven by financialisation, what is left of gentrification? This problem was explicitly, if 
paradoxically,  acknowledged in recent studies from  Lisbon that describe d a ‘gentrification 
without gentry’ (Krähmer 2017; Krähmer and Santangelo 2018). And yet, what is the point 
 
4 Hackworth and Smith (2001) discussed three historical ‘waves’ of gentrification in Anglophone countries, 
characterised by changing patterns and modes  – from sporadic gentrification, to its anchoring, and then its 
return, with increasing role of large -scale capital and state policies. The fourth wave, theorised by Lees and her 
colleagues (2008), is characterised by a deepening of financialisation and pr o-gentrification policies. Finally, 
in the fifth wave finance has become the central actor, replacing the state in the process (Aalbers 2019b: 2).  
12 of using gentrification in absence of gentr y, when the concepts of investment (for tourism, 
speculation or whatnot)  and displacement  are at hand?  
Sequera and Nofre (2018)  contributed  to th is debate by  theoretically  criticis ing the 
incorporation of touristification within the gentrification framework . Gentrification and 
touristification entail diff erent processes : different groups are displaced (working classes vs. 
cross -class displacement), demographic trends are quite opposite (replacement vs. 
depopulation) ; the property structure is different (homeownersh ip vs. real estate investment); 
and the actors involved in  the two businesses often  have conflictual interests  (e.g. early 
‘gentrifiers’ often become anti -touristification activists) . Sequera and Nofre therefore  
advocated ‘de -linking’ touristification and gentrification.  Thus they did in a follow -up article 
(Sequ era and Nofre 2019) based on research made in historical Alfama neighbourhood in 
Lisbon:  there , touristification – accelerated  by short -term rental  since  2016/2017 – 
interrupted pre-existing  processes of marginal gentrification and studentification. Different 
are the results of Lopez -Gay and his colleagues’ study (2020)  on Barcelona  made form the 
perspective of international mobility . There,  ‘floating’ European and North -American 
populations  have creat ed territorial enclaves in the touristified centre of Ba rcelona , showing 
that touristification and  – specific forms of – gentrification can coexist in (Southern 
European ) historical centres.  
Notwithstanding the empirical specificities that  partially  explain these different 
conclusions – Lisbon and Barcelona are in very different stages of the processes here 
described –, these  studies provide us with important, complementary conceptual reminders: 
Sequera and Nofre (2018; 2019) are convincing in their critique of the conceptual unification 
of gentrification  and touristification; while  Lopez -Gay and colleagues  (2020), by showing a 
13 case of coexistence, warn us that we cannot ultimately de -link them . How to get out  of this 
(apparent) paradox?  
Since  the pro blem is with levels of abstraction and  conceptual  travel (see above), Stuart 
Hall’s discussion  (1986: 7)  of modes of conceptualisation in Gramscian Marxism  can help 
us. Hall reminded us that ‘ concepts can operate at very different levels of abstraction ’, but 
that levels of abstraction should not be  ‘misread’ for  one another. As we have seen, concepts 
like gentrification and touristification – born as quite concrete ones – have been forced to 
take higher level of abstraction  to fit to  a variety of  different contexts . In the process  they 
have been  extremely simplified ; and, when used at the local level, their (now higher) level of 
abstraction has often been misread, making then  ultimately less analytically  (and 
strategically) powerful. The challenge  is to make  these concept s travel without giving up  
their concreteness.  Our proposal is to use them  through the lenses  of articulation , as it was 
developed in Laclau and Mouffe’s discourse theory (1985). Articulation  is ‘any practice 
establishing a relation among elements such that their identity is modified’ (Laclau and 
Mouffe 1985: 105).  Developed to explain the construction of (discursive) forms of 
hegemony, articulation allows to take ‘a middle position between st ructure and agency’ (De 
Cleen and Stavrakakis 2017, 305), thus helping mediating between multi -scalar determinants 
of change like transnational capital flows and local politics.  
We argue that articulation is particularly adequate to connect  local dynamics  of change  
with mid -range concepts like gentrification and touristification, and the relations between the 
latter and an intermediate concept like financialisation.  In what follows, we will  provide 
empirical substance to this claim  by focusing on the case o f Mouraria, its multi -scalar links 
with Southern European phenomena , and these latter context’s wider  transformations . 
 
14 3. Regeneration and local development: when Mouraria was a ‘deviant’ case  
 
Mouraria is a historical neighbourhoo d in central Lisbon, cha racteris ed by significant 
social diversity. Its spatial fabric , typical of Arabic urbanism,  is a maze of narrow alleys on 
the slopes of two hills, with generous public spaces (Almirante Reis avenue and Martim 
Moniz s quare) located on its western fringe. Th e neighbourhood has long been  a frontier -
land, in -between the touristic neighbourhoods  of Baixa  and Castelo , and the residential Anjos  
and Graça . Mouraria was one of those neighbourhoods that abound in Southern European 
centres, where migrant populations could find  a ‘backdoor to the city’ (Malheiros 2010); 
decades of institutional disinvestment have gone hand in hand with discourses about ‘decay’; 
and, recentl y, regeneration  discourses and policies abounded . 
In 2008,  the socialist municipal government ma de Mouraria the flagship of its 
regenera tion strategy, mobilising  a number of programmes (Tulumello 2016b: Table A2) . 
Requirements for refurbishment were simpli fied, municipally -owned dwellings were  sold to 
boost private real estate and construction investment. The strategy for local development was 
shaped around three pillars: public space  refurbishment ; stimulus to entrepreneurship and 
tourism ; and improvement of services for vulnerable populations. While the economic crisis 
hit Portugal (in 2009 ) and the country reques ted a financial bailout (in 2011 ), negotiating 
deep austerity measures, the regeneration agenda became, together with the attraction of 
tourism a nd international investment, the central feature of local  anti-crisis policies  (Seixas 
et al. 2016) , further increasing the symbolic importance of Mouraria for the municipal  
government. According to  several  authors (e.g. Corte -Real 2015; Tulumello 2016b; Carmo 
and Estevens 2017 ), the regeneration strategy w as typical of neoliberal policymaking : 
disproportionate investment on entrepreneurship and tourism when compared to social 
15 cohesion polic ies; absence of p ublic housing policies ; focus on concepts like capacity 
building, activation, partnership, participation and empowerment  – on neoliberal co -optation 
of the participation agenda, see Mi raftab (2004) and Falanga (2018 ); and branding of cultural 
activiti es (especially  Fado music) . 
And yet, while  regeneration policies were fostering  gentrification and touristification in 
other  neighbourhoods in central Lisbon (Mendes 2013; Nofre 2013), Mouraria walked a  
different  path. Up until late 2014, real estate prices  were not growing , or were growing slower 
than in other parts of  central  Lisbon  (Tulumello 2016b: 129 -132); and  the influx of young 
households  with relatively low economic and relatively high cultural capital was not causing  
displacement – rather , new and old residents were  creating networks crucial for local 
development (Malheiros et al. 2013 ; Tulumello 2016b) . Indeed , studies  about the ‘crisis ’ 
period (see Figure 1) are dominated by discussions about Mouraria’s ‘super -diversity’, 
heritage and culture, and their role in  urban change and development (e.g. Bettencourt and 
Castro 2015; Galhardo 2015 , 2019 ; Menezes 2015; Oliveira 2015;  Padilla 2015;  Padilla and 
Gallardo 2015; Mendes, Padilla, and Azevedo 2016; Oliveira and Padilla 2017).  
Mouraria was interpreted  as a space of negotiation  and conflict  between , on the one hand, 
an institutional action driven by neoliberal ideas , and, on the other, a ‘dense’  social fabric  
capable of organising on the grounds of its own socio -cultural diversity (Tulumello 2016b; 
see also Carmo and Estevens 2017): the latter, Tulumello argued (2016b), was being able to 
take advantage of  the contradictions and ambiguities of neoliberal urban policies to undergo 
a path of local development. However, the question remained open ‘whether current trends 
[would] consolidate in local development, increased diversity, and social cohesion – or turn 
toward advanced stages of gentrification’ ( 2016b : 132).  
16 Granted, signals existed of the ambiguity of ongoing processes, as exemplified by an 
episode in 2012, when the president of the republic visited the regeneration works in 
Mouraria. Activists from  cultural alternative centre dA Barbuda denounced that local drug 
dealers cooperated with the presidential security detail to maintain order; and afterwards 
threatened the activists, who had organised a protest (Largo da Severa N8 2012). The end of 
the activi ties of the collective – described by politicians and tourist guides as ‘a bunch of 
anarchists’ (Ropio 2012) – and the eviction, in May 2012, of another  squat (Casa de S. 
Lázaro ), together with the clearance of graffiti and other ‘signs of dissent’, someho w 
anticipated the future path of the neighbourhood. While leaving the place, the collectives 
wrote a premonitory letter, arguing that ‘the people that are now expelling us [the drug 
dealers and long -term residents more generally] are likely to be those tha t will be expelled in 
turn by the process of “city cleansing”’ (Largo da Severa N8, 2012). But things would only 
accelerate once processes starting in different places abruptly change d the context, in 
Portugal and Lisbon – and to those processes we shall n ow turn.  
 
4. ‘Post-austerity’ in Portugal and Lisbon ? 
 
2015 was a year of sea changes  for Portugal. Despite the  conclusion of the bailout  and the 
return to economic growth, the social impacts of austerity had eroded the support to the 
centre -right government. November 2015 elections brought to power an unprecedented 
coalition made up of the centre -left Socialist Party, and left -wing Communist Party and Left 
Block, in support of a socialist government. The  new majority’s  discourse was 
straightforward: it was time to turn the page of austerity . Some of the measures approved 
during previous years, including  cuts to wages of public employees, tax increases and cuts to 
17 allowances , have been reverted (Fernandes et al.  2018) ; and  the minimum -wage was 
repeatedly increased.  Amid a favourable external environment, economic growth was driven 
by export ation s, especially tourism , and then by the stimulus to domestic consumption due 
to the easing  of austerity measures ( Teles 2018 ). This also proved pos itive for national 
finances, with deficit plummeting. Soon, progressive commentators found  in Portugal  the 
proof that an ‘alternative to austerity’ exist ed (Jones  2017; Alderman 20 18), while  a global 
hype was building around Lisbon, now described as the ‘c oolest capital in Europe’  (Dunlop 
2017 ). 
There are , however,  reasons to be sceptical of th is narrative: housing is an excellent entry 
point to expose  the ambiguous nature of the  ‘post -austerity’ age.  During the crisis , the 
national government  approved , under request of international lenders, a number of measures 
to liberalis e housing and real estate : a reform of spatial planning  (Law 31/2014 and Decree -
Law 80/2015)  made real estate operations easier  (Tulumello et al. 2020 : 77; see EC 2012 : 
78); a reform of the urban lease regime  (Law 31/2012)  eased the termination of rental 
contracts ( Cardoso  2019 : 85; see EC 2011 : 87-88); and an extraordinary regime for 
refurbishment  operations  (Decree -Law 53/2014) allowed for exceptions from building 
regulations (see EC 2011 : 88). Additionally,  a Golden Visa scheme  (Law 29/2012)  was 
approved to  grant access to the Schengen area when investing  in real estate .5 As tourism  
boom ed in Portugal  – international arrivals increased 1 50% between 2009 and 20186 – and 
in Lisbon, disruptive  effect s on the real estate  market are evident for instance in the boom of 
 
5 Though the  scheme concedes authorisation of residence for other forms of investment, including capital 
investment for job creation, 94% of authorisations (7, 735 out of  8,207) were conceded to investors in real estate 
as of 2019 (Agência Lusa 2020) . 
6 World Bank data (see https://data.worldbank .org/indicator/ST.INT.ARVL ). 
18 short -term rentals.7 The hype surrounding Lisbon br ought  in town other groups with 
purchasing power higher  than local residents ’: European pensioners  attracted by Portugal’s 
good weather and fiscal incentives , international students  (see JLL and Uniplaces 201 9), and 
‘digital nomads’ and startuppers – a field in which the municipality has  invested heavily.8 
Investments eased by the reforms and growing international  demand have pushed real estate 
prices  to the sky , with double digit s yearly grow ths almost everywhere in the city.  As a result, 
more and more groups are being displaced  away fr om central areas , prompting local critical 
researchers to us e the concepts of gentrification , touristification  and financialisation  (see 
Section 2 ). 
This scenario forced  housing into the core of the  political agenda . As the nati onal 
government acknowledged the need of policy intervention  in 2017 , a newly appointed  
Secretary of State for Housing ha s work ed on a number of measures to stimul ate long -term 
affordable rentals ( included in the New Generation of Public Housing).9 Howeve r, the Prime 
Minister and the Secretary of State repeatedly claimed that they ha d no intention to revert the 
liberalisation of the housing market, and, indeed, none of the measures approved during the 
austerity years has been abolished or substantially reformed  (Tulumello, 2019 a). Some  
mitigation measure s have been undertaken : an act provid ing temporary suspension of 
evictions of long-term tenant s in vulnerable conditions ( poor elderl ies or disabled  people ; 
Law 30/2018 ) and a provision allowing  municipalities to put caps on short -term rentals (Law 
62/2018 ; see Section 6 on its weak implementation in Lisbon ). 
 
7 In Lisbon, 630 short -term rentals had been registered before the approval, in August 2014, of the new legal 
regime (Decree -Law 128/2014) , which liberalised the market by equalising short -term rental to residential use. 
From t hat date to the end of 2019, 18,447 more units have been registered, a 30 -fold increase. Data Turismo de 
Portugal, available at https://registos.turismodeportugal.pt/HomePage.aspx . 
8 See www.startuplisboa.com/ . 
9 See www.portaldahabitacao.pt/pt/portal/habitacao/npgh.html . 
19 In short, the field of housing give s us good reasons to be sceptical of the trumpeted ‘end’ 
of austerity. This is confirmed by commentators  from quite different backgrounds – in left-
wing magazines (Príncipe 2018; Teles 2018) and politic al science journals  alike  (Fernandes 
et al. 2018) – who have argued  that not much had changed also in fields such health, 
education, university, public transp ort, with investment stagnating or f urther plummet ing. 
Real estate and tourism ha ve contributed to  foster ing that very economic growth that allowed 
the government to revert some austerity measures while keeping a strict monetaris m – 
achieving a superavit  in 2019 national budget. In this sense, the unwillingness to revert  
previous  liberalisation measures  may be due to the fear of killing the ‘goose that laid the 
golden egg’.  
Austerity may have been eased,10 but this happened at the same time as austerity w as 
becoming even more entrenched into the institu tional fabric (Tulumello 2019b). This has 
been quite clear to social movements for the right to  housing, which have been growing in 
intensity and conflictuality  at an unprecedented pace during the years of t he ‘post -crisis’  (Di 
Giovanni 2019; Falanga  et al.  2019; Tulumello 2019b ; Accornero and Pinto 2020 ) – and, as 
we will see below, this is mirrored in political transformations in Mouraria.  
 
5. MourAirBnb: Mouraria become s ‘paradigmatic’  
 
Rosa Maria  understo od that things were about  to change in 2015.  While , until then, the 
local magazine was follow ing regeneration policies  with optimism , emphasising how local 
associations had been capable of protecting vulnerable actors (see Tulumello 2016b: 129), 
 
10 We use ‘may’ because the question remains open as to whether skyrocketing housing prices may have 
counterbalanced  the benefits of the fall of unemployment and slight increases of wages.  
20 articles  started to  raise concerns about gentrification  and speculation ( Lino 2015; Moura 
2015) . In what follows, we trace the changes in the f ield of real estate and housing; and then 
discuss political dynamics  (with  focus on the engagement in participatory policies and 
contentious politics ), a crucial dimension of the local capacity to resist gentrification during 
the ‘crisis’ period (cf. Tulum ello 2016b) . 
 
Real estate and housing dynamics  
 
Rosa Maria ’s concerns were confirmed as the neighbourhood bec ame the target for high-
end real estate operations  (Pellitero 2017: 3 ; Quaternaire Portugal 2017: 140 -143). Among 
these, AMouraria , advertised as ‘the only gated community with a huge garden, pool and 
parking in the historic centre of Lisbon’ (apud Alemão 2017) , and characterised by 
problematic issues, above all the authorisation given to build over an area appointed  by 
planning instruments  to be a green public space (Alemão 2017 ). 
Even more than by large  operations, the built environment has been reshaped  by tourism  
– which has become a central topic in works about Mouraria during the ‘post -crisis’ period  
(Figure 2 ; see especially Krähmer 2017; Lopes 2017; Muselaers 2017 ; Mandoux 2019 ) – and 
particularly  short -term rental  (Figure 3) . Quaternaire Portugal (2017: 144) found that in the 
area surrounding Olarias street short -term rental units were a few in 2013 and about 60 (or, 
about 10% of the total stock) as of 2017.11 As of August 2019 , we found 454 active rentals 
in AirBnb  and Home Away  (386 of which entire homes) , and 65 listings on Uniplaces, a 
 
11 Part of t his growth may be  due to regulari sation s following the  creation of the legal regime of short -term 
rentals in 2014 .  
21 platform for student housing ,12 cumulatively more than 20% of the total stock .13 In the same 
day we performed that  search,  we were able to find 10 apartments available for rent.14 Though 
these data do not provide  conclusive evidence on the causal role of short -term on the 
shrinking of l ong-term rental  – but see Cocola -Gant and Gago (2019 a) on this causal nexus 
in close neighbourhood Alfama –, they are indicative of the status of the real estate market . 
That intense speculative processes were  ongoing is made clear by the  fact that 470 apartment  
transactions  were  registered between  the second quarter  of 2018  and the first of 2019 ,15 
meaning that roughly  20% of the housing stock changed hands in just few months . 
Unsurprisingly, prices have skyrocketed: while as of late 2014 housing prices were 
significantly lower than in Lisbon,16 in the last quarter of 2019 the square meter was sold for 
a median value of 3, 646 euros, that is, 14% more than the municipal average.17 
 
FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE  
Figure 3. Hotels (red) and short -term rental facilities (black) registered in the centre of 
Lisbon and Mouraria in 2018 (adapted from CML 2018: map 10).  
 
These transformations were deeply felt by  local residents, in a social fabric characterised 
by groups  with mid to low economic capital:  elderlies, low -income households and 
 
12 Socorro  old parish area. Data : Market Minder by AirDna (available at www.airdna.co/ ); Uniplaces search 
engine ( www.uniplaces.com/ ).  
13 In Socorro parish, there were 2,091 flats in 2011  (data  national census , available at  www.ine.pt ). Due to 
renewals and refurbishments, numbers are likely to be  slightly  higher at the present day.  
14 We searched available listings on the ma jor websites for housing rental  (Imovirtual, Casa Sapo , Idealista and 
Remax ), removing duplicates . 
15 Data National Statistical Institute (see https://geohab.ine.pt/ ). 
16 Rents in Mouraria costed about 83 % of the municipal average, while the average expenditure for mortg age 
payment was about 70%  of the municipal average (our elaboration from Tulumello 2016b: Table 2).  
17 Data National Statistical Institute (see https://geohab.ine.pt/ ) referent to 94 sales  – and not available before 
2018 .  
22 immigrants , but also younger newcomers  (Tulumello 2016b: Table 1).  Though statistical data 
about evictions and rental contracts not renovated are not produced  at the local scale ,18 an 
ethnographic account has  pictured displacement in Mouraria  (Muselaers 2017: 41) , 
suggesting  that especially younger residents are being forced to leave the neighbourhood, 
while some elderly households have been protected by specific provisions.  Indeed, we know 
that this is not the case for young households only, as Habita – Association for the R ight to 
Housing, which organises households  at risk of displacement, has seen since 2017 an 
exponential growth of requests for help, including many elderly households from Mouraria.  
Although for a complete picture of demographic processes we will have to wait until the 
2021 census, real estate trends seem to be implying that the regeneration of the 
neighbourhood is not bringing about the long -desired repopulation of Mouraria.  The best 
quantitative picture available is provided by the  swift acceleration , since 2015 , of the  long-
term loss of registered voters in the old Socorro parish area (Quaternaire Portugal 2017: 67).  
For a qualitative perspective, we can mention a  local activist who noted  that many flats have 
been bought by foreign individuals , who  took advantage of the fiscal incentives of the Non -
permanent Resident Scheme, but often do not even reside in the neighbourhood for the six 
months a year they are supposed to: ‘we wanted to rehabilitate to not have an empty 
neighbourhood and now that we reh abilitate we have an empty neighbourhood all the same’ 
(interviewed in Krähmer 2017: 54 ; see also Lança and Paula 2019) . 
 
 
 
 
18 National level data show a steep growth of evictions in 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017, and a decrease in 2018 
(Neto 2019) . 
23 Local politics, from participatory to contentious politics  
 
Since 2007, Lisbon has  been  building an ‘incomplete system’ of participa tion by invitation  
(Allegretti and Spada 2016 ).19 Mouraria – one of Lisbon’s  67 Priority Intervention Areas – 
has been particularly active in  two programmes: the participatory budgeting  (PB)  and the 
BIP-ZIP programme .20 
In the two periods we are considerin g, Mouraria’s engagement adapted to the changing 
context and  evolution of the  city’s approach . As previously discussed (Section 3), during the  
years of  ‘crisis ’ the local community  maintain ed an intense level of participation to the 
transformations of their neighbourhood. This allowed a neighbourhood hardly representing  
0.5% of municipal  population to  conquer  22.8% of the resources distributed by the PB and 
2.3% of the funds provided by BIP -ZIP from  2011 to 201 4.21 Many proposals, in th e ‘crisis’  
period, were for ‘hard’ investments (a kindergarten, refurbishment  of public spaces and 
buildings, refurbishment  of markets, an escalator ), but the winners were often immaterial 
proposals, aimed at valuing welfare and social cohesion, promoting cultural identity and 
multiculturalism, or innovation centres for improving access to health and employment, and 
capacit y-building for local organis ations . At th at time, strategies like street meetings before 
the voting of PB helped to concentrate local voting on fe w priorities . Several  works in our 
review agree that the capacity of local actors to organise and attract participatory funds was 
 
19 The first EU capital to launch  a municipal  participatory budgeting (PB) with co -decisional nature,  Lisbon 
affected  the Portuguese panorama of PBs . With the transition of António Costa from mayor of Lisbon to Prime 
Minister, Portugal has been among  the first countries to experiment PB at national level.  
20 The latter – impleme nted yearly since 2011 – funds with up to 50,000 euros  local partnerships between parish 
governments, informal groups and other stakeholders, to regenerate and improve the quality of life in 67 ‘critical 
areas’ (see www.bipzip.cm -lisboa. pt). See Falanga (2019) for an overview.  
21 Our elaboration of municipal data (see www.bipzip.cm -lisboa.pt ; www.lisboaparticipa.pt ) and Falanga 
(2019).  
24 crucial for local development during the ‘crisis’ period ( Padilla 2015; Tulumello 2016b; 
Oliveira and Padilla 2017; Silva and Maia 2017; Xavier and  Almeida 2017) .22 
Institutional changes since  2013 – reduced  resources , rules for funding small er projects  in 
the PB (Allegretti and Antunes 2014; Allegretti, Dias and Antunes 2016) , changes in the 
rules of BIP -ZIP23 – pushed Mouraria’s inhabitants and act ors to change their attitudes, and 
their expansive contribution to participatory processes left room to a phase of small -scale 
adjustments. The number of p roposals  plummeted – 43 were submitted to the two programs 
until 2014, a dozen from 2015 to 2018 – and started changing,  with the domination of  green 
spaces and gardens, fairs, cultural events and street cleaning. In time, the capacity of 
mobilising locals for conquering funds was reduced , possibly an effect of the displacement 
of inhabitants and  more gen erally a signal of shrinking  social  cohesion . At this point,  the 
pocket -money distributed by participatory processes was just a drop in the sea of hard 
investments on the area, and could cover, at most, small complementary actions for 
improving the quality  of daily routine and the aesthetics of heavily refurbished spaces.24 This 
possibly explains why, starting in 2014, several organi sations based in Mouraria 
disseminated their presence as partners in 14 BIP -ZIP proposals for other areas, searching 
for allia nces that could look beyond the physical limits of their neighbourhood.  
While  participatory programmes were becoming less central to local development , 
increasing city -wide conflictuality in the field of housing  reverberated in Mouraria . The most 
relevant  episode  was the success  of the  mobilisation launched during the summer of 2017 in 
 
22 Corte -Real (2015a; 2016) claims that local residents were not involved in the participatory processes, but 
then admits that ‘new residents’ were involved, a dichotomy that glosses over the importance of new inhabitants 
in the local development Mouraria ex perienced during the ‘crisis’ period (see Section 3).  
23 For example, only entities rooted in the neighbourhood could submit bids  originally , while lately the 
programme has been opened to external actors (Ribeiro 2016).  
24 In 2018, the three projects presented to the BIP -ZIP programme concerned immaterial investments (youth 
capacitation, waste management and composting).  
25 defence of 16 households at risk of eviction because their landlord had sold the dwelling, 
located in Lagares street, to a company that intended to flip it into luxu ry or short -term 
rentals.25 The households  – and particularly the women – having  received a letter inform ing 
that their contracts would not be renovated, decided to  organise  with the support of Habita 
and other groups and individuals. Taking advantage of t he ongoing  campaign for the 
municipal elections , which was building up around housing issues, the mobilisation 
pressure d the municipality to either force the landlords to come to a deal or rehouse the 
families inside  the neighbourhood.  A first protest, org anised during the festivities of the 
patron of Lisbon, was p articipated by a couple hundred  persons, with a mix of long -term 
resident s, new residents and activists from  groups like Habita or Stop Despejos.  Eventually, 
the municipality stepped in and negoti ated with  the landlord t he renovat ion of  the contract 
for five years  in exchange for expediting the decision on another development  (Pincha 2017) . 
Granted,  the output wa s only a temporary halt to the eviction, and in many other cases – 
which we knew because of our participation in the activities of Habita – residents did not 
have the possibility or will to organise similar mobilisations. However, this process is worth 
mentioning  for two reasons. First, because it saw the political empowerment of the women 
that led the struggle (on the gendered dimensions of housing politics  in Lisbon , see 
Hernandez 2018 ). And, second, considering a multi -scalar perspective, this  episode was part 
and parcel of the building up of wider social movements for the right to housing  (see Section 
4), for instance in the participation of the women of Lagares street to the  Caravan for the 
Right to Housing, which travelled Portugal  in September 2017  to create  networks of 
solidarity among struggles (Falanga et al. 2019) . 
 
25 See a short movie by Left Hand Rotation , at https://vimeo. com/228956761 . 
26 Another relevant case is that of Martim Moniz square, which has been during the last 
couple of decades repeatedly transformed by the municipality in partnership with private 
developers  (Gomes 2 020). The latest project , for a large leisure and retail development, was 
announced without going  through the consultation mechanisms usually in place for 
transformations of public spaces, generat ing a wave of protests  in early 2019 . A coalition of 
local a nd non -local actors advocated the construction of a garden to contribute to the well -
being of neighbouring areas and the municipal  sustainability strategy; and was successful in 
putting a halt to the project, which is now being reconsidered by the municipa lity.26 
In short , though limited and characterised by relatively fragile networks between residents 
and activ ists, th ese episode s testif y the opening of the local social fabric to a more contentious 
approach to politics and to a wider scale of struggle, city-wide  and indeed national.  
 
6. Explaining the change: d iscussion  
 
We have seen how  ‘deviant’ Mouraria suddenly became unable to partic ipate in, and even 
take advantage of, the neoliberal regeneration policies favoured by the local government  –
moving to building up resistance to increasing forces of displacement ; and that the reasons 
for this shift  are multifactorial and located in proces ses at several levels – from chang ing 
municipal participatory policies , all the way to European pressures for reform under  austerity.  
Consequently, we can now question the factors of change, by  repeat ing the exercise 
previously carried out to explain why local development in the ‘crisis’ period was not 
producing displacement  (Tulumello 2016b) , using the three categories of factors capable of 
 
26 See www.jardimartimoniz.pt . 
27 halting gentrification (spatial, socio -political, policy) systematis ed by Ley and Dobson 
(2008) . 
First, let us consider  spatial characteristics and the supply of property  that may appeal  
investors . With  Mouraria  being  located  in a perfect location for property development  next 
to many amenities , a limit to gentrification was guaranteed by its Arabic spatial fabric, which 
reduces  room for high -end housing and facilities like parking or green areas. This has 
changed, in part, as big developments like AMouraria are restructuring the built environment 
and the municipality has been refurbishing public space s with the goal of dematerialising the 
spatial disadvantages of the neighbourhood  (see DN/Lusa 2018) . Maybe more importantly , 
tourism  has made the  spatial disadvantage a competitive advantage : tourists are happy to 
experience living in a ‘typical’ neighbourhood with narrow and steep streets; and the small 
apartments of Mouraria are perfect for short -term rental.  
Second, Ley and Dobson (2008) consider the social composition  and capacity for 
mobil isation.  While in the ‘crisis’ period  Mouraria’s diversity and associative fabric had been 
decisive for a type of social mobilisation capable of taking advantage of existing policies, 
especially participatory ones; the same actors have found it harder to organise  once external 
capital has become the first driver of urban change. At the same time , the ‘super -diversity’  
of the neighbourhood (Padilla and Gallardo 2015; Tulumello 2016b; Oliveira and Padilla 
2017)  is part and parcel of  the recent , if yet far fr om consolidated,  emergence of contentious 
politics – for instance, the collaboration of Portuguese and Nepalese women with foreign 
students and Portuguese activists in Lagares street. This topic deserve s further exploration, 
as one could speculate that the  recent growth in, and new forms of, mobilisation may be 
influenced by the influx , in central urban areas,  of educated and politicised youths , including 
from countries, like Germany, Italy and France , with longer  tradition of social conflict in the 
28 field o f housing  – an argument recently, if preliminarily, advanced for Lisbon more generally 
(Cocola -Gant and Gago 2019b, 23; Accornero and Pinto 2020) .27 Though it is early to take 
definitive conclusions  – and in need of specific empirical research –, hints exist of the 
transformation of the political arena toward  growing awareness, among residents, of the 
insufficiency of institutional participation in the face of global transformations such as the 
ones that are impacting Mouraria . 
Finally , Ley and Dob son consider the role of  policy  responses  to gentrification.  It was 
already obvious , during the ‘crisis’ period , that the absence of robust  housing policies  was 
the single most relevant factor that suggested a risk of displacement  (Tulumello 2016b) . As 
national policies approved under  austerity impact ed Mouraria, this became even more 
evident. The municipality, beyond punctual interventions like in the case of Lagares street, 
has reacted in 2018, assigning 100 apartments to long -term residents in historical  
neighbourhoods, and putting some limitations to  new licensing of short -term rentals  (see 
CML 2018) . ‘Too little, too late’, one is tempted to comment as, for instance, the short -term 
rental market was probably already saturated in Mouraria. Problematic is  also the 
disconnection between  housing  and participatory policies,28 the latter having been crucial in 
shaping social transformations, and more generally the scarce resources allocated to social 
cohesion in face of the waterfall of investments in real estate and refurbishment.  
 
 
27 Evidence exists of the low involvement of Portuguese in social movements (Accornero 2016). After the 
mobilisations in the post -revolutionary years (see Santos 2014 ), organised movements in the field of housing 
have virtually not existed. Habita, born as a collective around 2005, was the first group explicitly organising 
around this issue (Di Giovanni 2017). Some scholars are arguing that some of the reasons are to b e found in the 
aging and declining population of central urban areas, and then in the influx of individuals with political and 
social resources for mobilisation, phenomena observed earlier in cities like Barcelona ( Cocola -Gant and Gago 
2019b : 23; Accornero  and Pinto 2020) . 
28 Local actors are aware of this , a survey on the BIP -ZIP programme showed (Ribeiro 2016: 145) . 
29 7. Conclusions : from (touristic) gentrification to articulating  urban change  
 
The conclusion  of the  trajectory of Mouraria  is quite  familiar : it is the story of urban 
regeneration policies that, once successful, showed being desi gned to favour accumulation  
over local development . And yet, this does not explain the process : that there was a phase of  
local development; and how things changed. We sought to provide explanations by focusing 
on two distinct, yet close, periods in time – the years of ‘crisis’ (2008 -2014) and ‘post -crisis’ 
(2015 -2019) – and linking multi -scalar explanations and phenomena, from neighbourhood  
politics to national policy changes, and global tourism and speculation flows. The multi -
scalar analysis of ‘deviant’ Mouraria become ‘paradigmatic’ offers a number of takeaways 
to a discussion of urban change . 
With urban regeneration discourses and policies becoming  one of the hallmarks of the 
Southern  European version of capitalism  as instruments of attraction of capital flows , and 
facing the evidence that its cities are becoming increasingly shaped by global flows (cf. 
Balampanidis et al. 2019), we intended to reflect on the capacity of  concepts like 
gentrification , touristification and financialisation  to explain present trends . In Mouraria, 
local residents are being replaced  only partially  by gentries , and above all  by temporary users, 
tourists and the use of real esta te as financialised asset  – and this prompted critical scholars 
to use the concepts of  ‘touris m gentrification’ (Mendes 2017 ) and  ‘gentrification without 
gentry’ (Krähmer 2017; K rähmer and Santangelo 2018) . Our strategy to contribute to this 
discussion was that of consider ing the factors  that once  halted gentrification in Mouraria  and 
then were suddenly not capable of  doing it . If we were  expect ing that the change had been 
caused  by transformations  of the local (spatial, socio -political or policy ) factors , we would 
had been surprised : not much changed locally ; instead,  powerful  exogenous factors pushed 
30 change. During the last decade , Mouraria was capable of halting – even countering, to some 
extent – gentrification alone ; and , despite some successful, punctual resistances,  was 
dramatically reshaped when gentrification  accumulated  with touristification and financial 
speculation.  This story allows us to provide t wo types of takeaways – respectively with 
analytical and strategic nature – for research on urban change in Southern Europe and, more 
broadly, global urban studies.  
In analytical terms, the case of Mouraria  gives empirical substance to Sequera and Nofre’s 
argument (2018) about  the incapacity of gentrification to encompass tourism -driven change. 
At the same time, however , contra their conclusive argument  – and in line with Lopez -Gay 
and his colleagues’  conclusions (20 20) –, our case also suggests that  gentrification  and 
touristification  (and financialisation ) cannot be de-linked  and analysed as independent 
variables of urban change.  We have therefore resorted to articulation  as the lens to frame  
these processes . In Mouraria,  because of significant  local resistances , displacement  happened  
once gentrification  articulated with touri stification and financialisation, in the process losing 
one of its core characters, the presence of a ‘gent ry’ replacing former residents.  To come 
back to Maloutas’ definitional insights (2012; 2018), articulation does not strip these 
concepts of their con textual characters, warning that some of them will be lost, and replaced 
by other characters, when they travel. At the same time, this also allows to not reduce 
gentrification to hyper -simplistic definitions in the process. In other words,  we have shown 
that the high level of abstract ion of the concept of articulation  allows mid-range concepts like 
gentrification and touristification,  and an intermediate concept like financialisation  to have 
analytical power in contexts different from those where they origi nated .  
Not only do these considerations constitute epistemological instruments  crucial to 
fostering truly global urban studies; but they also help preventing the fetishization (Maloutas 
31 2018)  of gentrification . The capacity of articulation to lie in betwe en structure and agency – 
and therefore to explore the different ways in which these latter  interact and conflict at the 
local level – open s up to the strategic thinking that is crucial to critical urban studies.  Coming 
back to Mouraria’s  local politics, we have seen how, although social and cultural ‘density’ 
(see Tulumello 2016b) can provide local fabrics with the instruments to take advanta ge of 
some regeneration policies, our case  exemplifies the existence of  tipping points beyond 
which local organisation is not enough – confirming that the structural problem is the way 
mainstream regeneration policies are biased toward making a commodity o f urban space.  
This brings to two types of  considera tions – respectively with a more institutional and a more 
contentious  dimension – for the strategic  agenda of critical urban studies.  First, in line with 
Maloutas’ suggestion (2012:34) to focus on causal mechanisms, by focusing on those local 
aspects that have long made life tougher to real estate speculation in central urban areas (e.g., 
low levels of spatial segregation, diversity of social fabrics and urban planning policies 
traditionally based on regul ation) and how they recently changed, critical urban studies can 
provide concrete instruments to local policy actors interested in challenging gentrification 
and touristification.  
Second, w hile historical uneven development patterns , halted by the economic  crisis,  have 
been relaunched by austerity (see Hadjimichalis 2011), burgeoning evidences of 
gentrification, touristification and financialisation  show that Southern Europe is moving, 
from a region at the ‘borderlands’ of urban theory (Baptista 2013; Tulum ello 2016b), toward  
becoming a paradigmatic space of  experimentation of new forms of  urbanisation -as-
accumulation – and, at the same time, of the emergence of new politics and struggles for the 
right to the city.  If, because of the increasing ly central  role of the circuit of urbanisation  for 
global capitalism, the capacity of the ‘local’ in self -determining its own development path is 
32 increasingly being limited by actors and dynamics at different  scales , we have observed that, 
once again, this can only happ en on the ground  through specific articulations, which are 
inevitably characterised by contradictions and fragilities . At the same time, this exercise also 
warn s us of th e importance of building international networks and  scaling up , both for 
producing  relevant  knowledge and for supporting political struggles in cities throughout the 
world.  
 
Funding  
Simone Tulumello acknowledges funding from: Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia 
(FCT), project ‘HOPES: HOusing PErspectives and Struggles. Futures  of housing 
movements, policies and dynamics in Lisbon and beyond’ (PTDC/GES -URB/28826/2017); 
European Commission (EC), project ‘CONTESTED_TERRITORY. From Contested 
Territories to alternatives of development: Learning from Latin America’ (H2020 -MSCA -
RISE -2019, grant 873082). Giovanni Allegretti acknowledges funding from: FCT, project 
‘O orçamento participativo como instrumento inovador para reinventar as autarquias em 
Portugal e Cabo Verde: uma análise crítica da performance e dos transfers’ (PTDC/CS -
SOC/09 9134/2008); EC, project ‘EMPATIA – Platform Lab our in Urban Spaces’ (H2020, 
grant 822638).  
 
Acknowledgements  
We had the opportunity to observe the mobilisations described in the article because one of 
us is member of local association Habita; and we are g rateful to the residents in Lagares street 
and activists of Habita, Stop Despejos and Jardim Martim Moniz for their action on the 
33 ground. We are also grateful to the editors and two anonymous reviewers for constructive 
commentaries that helped us strengthe n our theoretical argument.  
 
