1 
 Three waves of state -led gentrification in China  
Shenjing He  
Department of Urban Planning and Design, The University of Hong Kong, email: sjhe@hku.hk  
 
To cite this paper: He, S. (2018) Three waves of state -led gentrification  in China , Tijdschrift voor 
economische en sociale geografie , (in press ) 
 
Abstract: This paper sees gentrification as a localised  response to  socio -economic changes with 
its own spatial -temporal rhythm , rather than an alien  practice  transplanted from its European 
and North American heartland.  Gentrification in China, as in any other contexts , is an innate 
process embedded in the dynamic urban metamorphosis , thus requires a provincialised lens to 
understand  its 'home grown ' experiences , mechanism and periodisation, while not losing sight 
of the macro politico -economic changes connected to globalisation, cosmopolitanism, and neo -
liberalism. Hence I propose an analytical framework of „state -centred triangular embedment‟ to 
enable a holisti c yet nuanced  examination  of the delicate entanglements of the state, market and 
society amidst the surging waves of gentrification  in China . Corresponding to  the changing 
politico -economic imperatives and shifting financing strategies of urban redevelopment , the 
relatively short history of gentrification in China can be roughly periodised in to three waves : 
The first wave  of sporadic gentrification as modest market experiments  in the 1990s, followed by 
2 
 the s econd wave  of widespread gentrification underwritten by neoliberal urban policies  in the 
2000s , and the t hird wave  of reactivat ed gentrification through shantytown redevelopment 
schemes under state -led financialisation  after 2010 . Over the last three decades, g entrification  
has become an integra l part of the making of the modern competitive state in China, joining 
force with the state‟s endeavour in extracting values from land/housing redevelopment through 
market operation , imposing modern (western) values to its society  while intermittently 
responding  to social contestations .  
Key words: state -led gentrification , wave -thinking, state -centred triangular embedment , state - 
market -society  interactions   
 
Early forms of gentrification were commonly interpreted as  a „back to the city‟ movement of 
capital flows (Smith, 1996) and /or the pursuit of particular cultural and lifestyle preferences by 
the new middle class (Ley, 1994). From the 1970s onwards, countries  across the world gradually 
develop their own „gentrifica tion blueprints‟ to reinvigorate the declining urban areas (Davison 
and Lees, 2005). Although it might not be accurate to claim that gentrification has been 
transmitted from the European -American heartland to the rest of the world, it is undeniable 
that ge ntrification has been developed into a „global urban strategy‟ (Smith 2002), and emerged 
in different forms in response to endogenous needs and peculiarities of the developing world. 
3 
 The variations in politico -economic system, land ownership, land developm ent regimes and 
housing preferences/aesthetics etc. have produced variegated gentrification in different contexts  
(Forrest, 2016).  
Responding to the  wider economic and political restructuring, three  waves of gentrification 
have surged first in North America and Europe  and soon swept the rest of the world  (Hackworth 
and Smith, 2001; Wyly and Hammel, 2001 ; Murphy , 2008 ; Visser  and Kotze , 2008; He , 2012 ; 
van Gent 2013 ). The fourth wave  gentrification , featuring the financialisation of the housing 
market and the  consolidation of  pro-gentrification and polarised urban policies , has been 
identified  in the United States ( Lees et al. , 2008), but its resonance in other contexts  is yet to be 
found . Even though the periodisation of gentrification varies in different contexts, especially the 
vast territory outside of the European -American heartland, the „wave thinking ‟ remains a 
valuable perspective to stage gentrification in the changing nexus of economic restructuring, 
state intervention, cultural and societal changes in different contexts.  
        Three interrelated processes , namely  globalisation, cosmopolitanism , and neo -liberalism 
are commonly  recognised as the key mechanism accounting for  the widespread of gentrification 
outside of Western Europe and the Anglophone world ( see Atkinson and Bridge; 2005; Rofe, 
2003; Smith, 2002 ; Harris 2008 ). Despite of their compe lling explanatory power, t hese 
dominant views have a tendency to presume gentrification as an alien  practice transplanted  
4 
 from and converg ing to the west, rather than an innate process embedded in the local context.  
In this essay, I try to argue that gentr ification in China, as in any contexts , emerges from a 
localised process and follows its own  tempo , thus requires a provincialised lens to understand its 
mechanism and periodi sation , while not losing  sight of the macro politico -economic changes  
connected to globalisation, cosmopolitanism, and neo -liberalism . Therefore, I propose a 
different „wave thinking‟ to periodise the relatively short history  of gentrification in the Chinese 
context , which does not necessarily coincide with  the waves identi fied by western scholars . 
Gentrification in China can be roughly periodised in to three waves, which correspond to  the 
changing politico -economic imperatives and shifting financing strategies of urban 
(re)development.  The discrepant periodisation of China‟s gentrification alludes to several key 
message s that this essay tries to convey.  First of all, being an innate process embedded in the 
dynamic urban meta morphosis , gentrification in the specific context of China is a localised  
response to socio -economic changes with its own spatial temporal rhythm , thus does  not follow 
the pre -existing trajectories documented in the US or anywhere else. Second, a thorough 
understanding of the 'home grown ' experiences of gentrification  in China, which is expected to 
push the boundaries  of gentrification research , particularly  in the global south, calls for a fresh 
look at the manifestation and mechanism of the urban process es that unfold at different paces 
and patterns in a context and temporal -specific manner. Third, a reframed waving -thinking 
5 
 built upon Hackworth and Smith‟s (2001) seminal work would certainly shed new lights on the 
constantly consolidating yet evolving phenomenon of gentrification and positively respond to 
the call of  reimaging our urban futures through a new prism.  
        To avoid falling into either side of the simple divide of supply -side and demand -side 
explanations , a critical examination of the emerging market towards a deeper investigation of 
the multifaceted nature of urban society and of the unsettled interface between state, capital and 
society is urgently needed to provide an updated documentation and critical a ssessment of the 
three waves of gentrification in China  (He and Qian, 2017 ). A Polanyian view of the political 
economy of the capitalist world, especially the dialectical process of marketisation and social 
responses, is highly inspirational here. Although Polanyi had never explicitly discussed the role 
of the state in his theorisation of the „double movement‟ between the self -regulating market and 
the self -defending society, he had been inexplicitly viewing the state as an indispensable yet 
highly responsive and pragmatic agent, which can be best manifested in his often cited 
statement „the laissez faire was planned, but planning was not ‟ (Polanyi, 2001: 141 ). To 
foreground the role of the state in urban trans mutations , I propose that, instead of th e 'double 
movement', the making of the modern state in China that brings a close bond among the state, 
market, and society, can be termed as a „triangular embedment‟, or more accurately „state -
centred triangular embedment‟ in the Chinese context. A triangu lar relation emerges amidst the 
6 
 state, market and society, in which the state plays a central role to sustain and reconcile their 
interrelations. Although the interplays among the three key forces are also commonly observed 
in other contexts, an analytical  framework explicitly incorporating the interventionist state in 
tandem with the market and societal forces has rarely been adopted in unfolding the changing 
dynamics of urban transformation s. Although the discussion of the „roll out‟ neoliberalism has 
fully recognised the indispensable role of the state in mediating and buttressing the market in 
shaping the urban built environment (see Brenner  and Theodore , 2002; Hackworth, 2008; Peck 
and Tickell, 2002 ), the market is generally believed to lead an imperati ve and paramount 
position in a laissez faire context. Au contraire, China studies tend to overemphasise the 
omnipotent role of the state, which is at the heart of „China exceptionalism‟, while often overlook 
the increasingly proactive market and the highly  responsive societal force. In contemporary 
China, where an authoritarian regime invigorated by neoliberal economy policies and 
intermittently adjusted to social contestations, three sets of forces from the state, market and 
society are constantly striking  to maintain an equilibrium through the trade -offs between 
different goals, thus produce various outcomes of urban transformation and fragmentation (He 
and Lin, 2015; He et al. 2017). Leaving out any of these three key actors will lead to an 
incomplete und erstanding of the urban metamorphoses in the Chinese city. This essay therefore 
proposes an analytical framework of „state -centred triangular embedment‟ taking the state -
7 
 market -society interplays into account to develop a thorough understanding and interpr etation 
of the three waves of gentrification in China. It is worth noting that it is not possible to crystalise 
the exact timeline for the three waves of gentrification in China precisely because gentrification 
is a continuous and lasting process and China  is a vast country long suffering from uneven 
development. In a similar vein, the transition between different waves of gentrification is by no 
means a smooth process, but a highly contested interplay among the state, market and society. 
Therefore, I see t he transition between different waves of gentrification as the tipping point of 
the equilibrium of the state -market -society interactions. When interplays between the three 
forces reach a balance, usually under the orchestration of the state, a new wave of gentrification 
is up and running. In contrast, gentrification reaches a cul de sac when the equilibrium is 
broken, until a new balance is formed which signifies the advent of a new wave of gentrification. 
The following sections detail the three waves of ge ntrification in urban China and the transition 
between them. Considering large cities usually setting the trend of urban transformations and 
the lagging effect in smaller inland cities, the periodisation of gentrification in this essay is 
mainly based on t he development in major Chinese cities such as Shanghai, Guangzhou, 
Nanjing and Chengdu.  
 
First wave: sporadic gentrification as modest market experiment s  
8 
 Resembling  gentrification in the United States prior to 1973, the first -wave  gentrification in 
China emerged since  the mid -1990s in large cities such as Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangzhou, in 
the wake of land and housing markets being reintroduced in China. As  modest experiment s of 
marketised operation  with the  involvement of  private developers, s poradic housing 
redevelopment projects justified by housing upgrading , city betterment , and infrastructure 
improvement are the common form s of gentrification during that stage. Due to the heavy fiscal 
burden associated with relocating original residents and  the potential risks inherent to the 
unfledged housing market, most gentrification projects during that period targeted old urban 
neighbourhoods designated as „dangerous and dilapidated housing areas‟ ( weijiufang ), or urban 
areas in urgent need for infrastructure improvement, e.g. building the metro lines, expanding 
roads and green spaces.  Occasionally, fuelled by heavy  investment from both the state and the 
private sector, some  large -scale redevelopment projects  have been implemented in Shanghai 
and Beijing to build China‟s world cities . In order to make sufficient profit, these redevelopment 
projects have resulted in further densification of the inner city and led to  inexorable 
displacement , where  original resid ents were rarely offered the choice of in situ  resettlement .  
Although situations vary from city to city, in general the burgeoning gentrification reached a 
bottleneck in the late 1990s, not only because the high density redevelopment destroyed the old 
urban fabric and caused widespread criticism, but also because its investment and 
9 
 redevelopment mode became more and more unfeasible owing to the extremely high relocation 
costs, especially during the Asian financial crisis. With little investment in the rund own old 
urban areas, many central city redevelopment projects were postponed. The aim of the first 
wave gentrification was relatively modest, i.e. to fight urban blights by improving housing 
conditions and infrastructure  (He, 2012) . There were no systematic schemes or considerable 
investment to implement citywide redevelopment. In general, gentrification depended highly on 
the urgency of housing and infrastructure improvement and the availability of sporadic private 
investment.  
The first-wave gentrification  in China  is different from the one identified by Hackworth and 
Smith (2001) in several aspects. First, classical form of gentrification that initiated by middle 
class and artists rarely happened in China in the 1990s owing to the  underdeveloped housing 
market. Second, the state was the initiator of gentrification right from the very beginning . Third, 
private developers were involved but less active, often in corporation with the local government, 
and have  led to the demolition and  rebuild of the entire neighbourhood s. These differences  
fundamentally l ie in the interplay among the state, market and society. During the first -wave 
gentrification, the state play ed a dominant role in several aspects, including  stimulating and 
accommodating housing needs of the emerging middle class, reducing the market risks of 
private developers, and tackling the fragmented property rights by relocating original residents 
10 
 (He, 2007).  A new ly established  state -market relation characterised by modest state -led 
experiment s of market operation  emerged . The state -society relation somehow showed a path -
dependency of welfare provisio n at least discursively , e.g. under the name of housing upgrading  
and city betterment , inherited from the pre -reform  era, although residential displacement had 
become an inevitable outcome.  An equilibrium was formed among the state -market -society to 
sustain the modest gentrification experiments for almost a decade in the 1990s, until the Asian 
Financial  Crisis hit the n ascent market economy in China‟s mainland heavily in 199 7. A number 
of hidden crises, including the unsustainable state investment in infrastructure and city 
betterment and the market uncertainties and risks unveiled by the economic recession, started 
to loom large and eventually put a halt to the burgeoning gentrification by the end of the 1990s.  
 
Second wave: widespread gentrification underwritten by neoliberal urban policies  
The advent of the new millennium  borne witness to the surge of s econd -wave gentrification, 
when China was deepening its market -oriented reform s and further integrated in the world 
economy. With private developers‟ more active participation in urban redevelopment, 
gentrification swept the inner cities around the countries. In globalising cities such as Beijing, 
Shanghai, Guangzhou, and Shenzhen, gentrification is more closely linked to national and global 
economic and cultural processes.  The second -wave gentrification therefore features ambitious 
11 
 urban upgrading s cheme aiming for buil ding globalised and modernised cities and changing 
urban policies attracting private investment and catering for the housing preferences of the 
rapidly emerging middle class.   
After more than a decade‟s rapid expansion, urban growth in  many large Chinese cities has 
reached a bottleneck due to the stringent polic ies control over urban expansion and arable land 
protection enacted by the central state. The local governments thereafter started to reconsider 
promoting urban redevelopment as a new growth strategy. Meanwhile, many developed cities 
along the east coast are facing the challenges of industrial upgrading and revitalising  derelict 
industrial land. Against this backdrop,  some experimental urban redevelopment policies known 
as „sanjiu  gaizao ‟ (meaning to redevelop three old things, i.e. old urban areas, old factories, and 
old villages, „three olds‟ hereafter) have effectively stimulate d a trend of gentrification 
nationwide. The experimental „three olds‟ redevelopment policy was first implemented in 
Guangdong Province, later has inspired other provinces especially those along the east coast to 
experiment similar redevelopment schemes. At a time when the central gov ernment is 
tightening up land provision, this policy explored new ways to achieve „more efficient‟ land use 
through urban redevelopment. The soaring property price after 2000 also lured the active 
participation of private developers in these redevelopment projects. In Guangzhou alone, it was 
estimated that more than 10 million square meters of buildings will be demolished under this 
12 
 scheme, which will relocate about 0.6 million people, with around 100 billion RMB‟s total 
investment (He, 2012). The „three ol ds‟ redevelopment scheme was positioned as „government -
guided market operation‟, which allows private market gentrification to flourish , while the state 
removing the barriers of market uncertainty, land deficiency, and land assembly, by 
manipulating the planning  tools , especially the Floor Area Ratio (FAR). During the second -wave 
gentrification , local governments have managed to channel a large volume of capital flow to 
rebuild the central city through introducing pro -market policies and planning tools. Ess entially, 
the „three olds‟ redevelopment policy represents a bold neoliberal experiment unleashing a huge 
stock of land for value extraction.  
The central cityscapes and socio -spatial configuration have  been fundamentally 
transformed  thereafter . Resembling  the sweeping gentrification in ethnic enclaves in New York 
City and other US cities (Zukin, 2009), large Chinese cities are experiencing an outright 
evisceration of native communities, including urban villages accommodating tens of thousands 
of migrant wo rkers, from the city centres to make room for  new urban space serving  the middle 
class . Low -income neighbourhoods were replaced by well -appointed apartments  and trendy 
Recreation and Business Districts (RBD). Empty workshops and warehouses were turned into  
loft office s and „cultural and creative industry clusters‟ (Zheng, 2011) . It was also not uncommon 
that mega -events,  such as the 2008 Beijing Olympics, the 2010 Shanghai World Expo, and the 
13 
 2010 Guangzhou Asian games, have become the catalyst triggering s wift large -scale 
gentrification . Resultantly, residents‟ protests and resistances are ubiquitous and have at times 
threaten ed social stability. In 2011, the central government had to revise the regulations on 
land /housing expropriation and compensation in order to mitigate  the growing discontents 
associated with widespread gentrification. This has temporarily calmed down the second -wave 
gentrification.  
The second -wave gentrification manifests the re -coordinated sta te-market -society 
relations whereby local governments are reimagining the city and seeking economic growth, the 
rising middle -class aestheticisation is in tandem with prosperous consumer culture, while 
conflicts between local governments and displacees are  intensified. It is worth noting that the 
second -wave gentrification is related to the emerging neoliberal capital accumulation regime 
through the operation of land and housing commodification and privatisation; toward s a new 
market -society relation that f oster the consumer culture and middle -class aestheticisation; and 
toward s a more perplexing and subtle state -society relation striking a balance between efficient 
relocation and social stability. Fundamentally, the deepening of market -oriented reforms and 
the societal responses have affected gentrification strategies and practices, and reshaped the 
urban socio -spatial landscapes. Different from the first wave, the stagnancy of the second wave 
of gentrification was mainly attributed to the escalating conflic ts between displacees and the 
14 
 alliance between local government and developers, in which the societal force resembling that 
described in Polanyi‟s „double movement‟ brought the state -market -society equilibrium to a 
tipping point and terminated the second w ave gentrification, until the state started to 
proactively remedy the state -society relation, signified by the announcement of the revision of 
the Land and Housing Acquisition Act in 2011, which prohibits enforced demolition and 
stipulates new regulations,  such as compulsory public participation, to safeguard displacees‟ 
economic rights.     
 
Third wave: reactivating gentrification through shantytown redevelopment 
schemes under state -led financialisation  
From 2010 onwards, China has introduced several rounds of  national state -led housing schemes , 
including  massive affordable housing construction and large -scale shantytown redevelopment  
schemes (SRS) . In 2011, 36 million units of affordable housing were proposed  to be constructed 
during China‟s 12th five-year -plan period (2011 -2015). In September 2015, the State Council 
decided to initiate a „three -year -plan‟ (2015 -2017) to redevelop another 18 million housing units 
in shantytowns.  After the previous schemes were successfully implemented , a third roun d of 
large -scale SRS  was announced in 2017, aiming to further redevelop 15 million  units of 
shantytown houses from 2018 to 2020. A considerable proportion of affordable housing is 
15 
 reserved to rehouse residents affected by SRS in certain cities such as Shen yang  and Nanjing. In 
many other cities, e.g. Shanghai and Chengdu, considerable amounts of cash -compensation are 
offered to affected residents to stimulate their housing consumption, hence to reduce the 
housing inventory accumulated in the frenetic housing boom and to sustain the rocketing 
housing prices. More often than not, those nationwide large -scale SRS are turned into 
gentrification projects featuring high -value added property development.  
        To ensure the smooth execution of these housing schemes, local  cadres were required to 
sign obligatory agreements to accomplish certain amount of affordable housing construction 
and SRS . Various forms of state -led financialisation were introduced by the ce ntral government 
to provide financing sources for these less profitable redevelopment projects, which include low -
interest and long -term borrowings from the financial market and institutional investors, notably 
the China Development Bank, buttressed by the  central financial authorities and local 
governments (He et al., 2018). At the local level, a special form of state -owned corporation, local 
financing platforms (LFP) is established through constant capital injection from the local 
government and restructu red into an „operational entity ‟, which can directly undertake 
construction activities and operate municipal utilities. In many cities, LFP is also reshaped into 
a highly qualified borrower through which local states can employ a variety of financing 
instr uments (i.e. corporate bonds, private placement note, medium -term note and short -term 
16 
 financing bills) to finance urban redevelopment. In addition, a „Built and Transfer ‟ model was 
also introduced to smooth the financing channels between local states, LFPs  and financial 
institutions, and enable LFPs using more sophisticated financing instruments to directly borrow 
money from the capital market. Using LFP as a financial instrument, with central government 
dredging the financial channels, local states are abl e to capitalise the perspective yields from the 
sales of reserved land and repackage SRS with other projects into financial assets that can be 
sold to investors to leverage sufficient investment  (He et al., 2018) .  
        Notably, the incremental state -led financialisation introduced in the SRS  topically reflects 
the 'variegated financialisation of housing' (Aalbers 2017).  The financiali sation of urban 
redevelopment in China, characteri sed by strong administrative interventions, is sub stantially 
different from those in advanced capitalist economies, in terms of both the financing processes 
and the outcomes. The nationwide low -cost financing campaign for SRS was largely achieved 
through a distorted domestic financial market and the secur itisation of high sovereign credit 
manipulated by the interventional state. The state -led financiali sation of urban redevelopment 
involves multi -scalar state interventions, including the policy mediation from the central state, 
the overall orchestration an d manipulation by the local states, and the entrepreneurial operation 
of state -owned LFPs  (He et al., 2018) . Resultantly, s tate capital plays a significant role in 
pacifying social unrest caused by demolition conflicts and affordability crisis , while the LFP , a 
17 
 representative of state capitalism, assists the local state to successfully achieve the dual goal of 
social stability and economic growth .   
       In the previous decade, due to the lack of land resource to provide resettlement housing, social 
discontents and national policies have pushed  the second -wave gentrification to an end. Urban 
redevelopment projects were paused in first and second tier cities, especially those cities  with little 
land resources and a high concentration of low -rise buildings and low -income population. For these 
cities, implementing the SRS  is not simply a fulfillment  of the central government‟s political order, 
more importantly, it opens a new window for reviving gentrification. These ambitious housing 
schemes signified the ad vent of the third -wave gentrification, in which the once -placated 
gentrification is reactivated by the nationwide resettlement housing provision and shantytown 
redevelopment projects.  Although the state always plays a n indispensable  role in China‟s 
gentrification, the third -wave gentrification has demonstrated a stronger state intervention, as 
manifest ed in the predominant role of the LFP in implementing the SRS and the accelerated 
financing  and construction process of these scheme s under state -led financialisait ion. Seemingly , the 
state -market relation at this stage has moved far away from the neoliberal trajectory in the previous 
wave. Nonetheless, the SRS  underwritten by state -led financial sation has shown a strong 
entrepreneurial logic.  To a certain  extent, these schemes also exhibit the central government ‟s 
intention  to rectify the intense state -society relation  resulted from the second -wave gentrification. It 
18 
 is worth noting though, a lbeit directly benefiting affected  residents,  the recent wave of nationwide 
large -scale urban redevelopment cannot simply be interpreted as the return of the welfare state 
to promote social wellbeing, because the high costs of SRS has been passed onto the general 
urban households through the rapid fin anciali sation  process  and the booming real estate market 
(He et al., 2018).  To a large extent,  the SRS has been exploited as an effective device to achieve the 
dual goal of political and economic stability, and more importantly to set off a new wave of 
gentrification. Rather than the anathema to gentrification, state -initiated housing projects, especially 
the SRS, go hand in hand with gentrification in large Chinese cities.  
 
Conclusion  
Towards the ends of enhancing economic competitiveness and achieving a „modern‟ and 
„civilised‟ image, many large centuries -old Chinese cities have invested heavily in rebuilding 
themselves into world -class cities. Several waves of gentrification have swept these cities and 
thereby transformed the sociospatial landscape ( He, 2010 ; 2012 ). Large -scale bulldozer 
redevelopment and the heavy direct involvement of the local state typified the early wave of 
gentrification in China. More recently, the second -wave gentrification featured massive 
infrastructure investment, city beautifi cation, and upward urban redevelopment. In particular, 
entrepreneurial urban policies have introduced new practices, such as creative and cultural 
19 
 industry clusters, loft living, and mega -events, to gentrify the post -industrial Chinese cities 
(Zheng, 2011 ; Ren, 2014 ). From 2010 onwards, several rounds of  national redevelopment 
schemes  have been introduced under state -led financiali sation , which have given birth to the 
third -wave gentrification. Ironically, the  welfare -oriented policies  of shantytown redevel opment  
have been manipulated to enliven a new round of gentrification.   
The value of „wave -thinking‟ in gentrification studies mainly lies its articulation of  the 
changing role of the state in gentrification and a dynamic relation between governments and the 
private sector  centralised on land and housing -based accumulation.  Although the periodisation 
of gentrification varies significantly in different contexts, a vigorous role played  by the state , 
regardless the diverse forms and sc ales of state intervention,  has emerged as a key feature in the 
third -wave  and even the fourth -wave gentrification. State -led gentrification as well as the 
changing role of the state are thus commonly observed in various  contexts. For in stance, the 
evolvem ent from direct state involvement to state interventionism  (or vise verse) , as 
documented by Hackworth and Smith (2001) certain finds its resonance in China‟s 
gentrification, specifically in the second wave gentrification , whereas  the third wave 
gentrification features a stronger state presence involving both direct state involvement and  
policy interventio n. Even the motivations  of state -led gentrification could be very similar 
regardless the institutional and socioeconomic differe nces , e.g. to enhance  tax revenue , to serve 
20 
 certain political purposes, to „reinvigorate ‟ those socially vulnerable  and/or  economically risky 
neighbourhoods (Hackworth and Smith, 2001). Nonetheless , the specific forms and outcomes of 
state -led gentrification could alter in different time periods and different geographical locations. 
In Europe, especially the Netherlands, state -led gentrification is often bundled with social 
mixing policies to mitigate poverty concentrations and urban d ecline (Davidson 2008, Teernstra 
2015) , which, against  its original intentions, has inevitably brought threats of displacement to 
lower -income communities  (Davidson 2008; Lees 2008) . In comparison , state -led 
gentrification comes with a stronger entrepreneu rial logic in the global south and emerging 
economies such as Rio De Janeiro, Cap Town, Istanbul, Hong Kong, and Mumbai  (Harris, 2008; 
Visser  and Kotze  2008; Ley and Teo 2014, Islam and Sakızlıoğlu 2015, Gaffney 2016) . In China, 
an urban growth regime  centralised on land -(re)development emerge s in the post -reform era, 
whereby local go vernments are highly incentivised to initiate large -scale gentrification projects 
to reap lucrative tax revenue and drastically transformed the cityscapes (He and Wu, 2009).  
As demonstrated in the three waves of gentrification, to a large extent, gentrifi cation has 
become an integral part of the making of the modern competitive state in China, joining force 
with the state‟s endeavour in extracting values from land/housing redevelopment through 
market operation,  imposing modern (western) values to its socie ty while intermittently 
responding  to social contestations . In this regard, gentrification in the Chinese context is 
21 
 embedded with multiple connotations, which has gone beyond class succession, cultural 
preference, landscape upgrading, and capital accumulation as suggested by classical theories 
(Glass, 1964; Smith  1996 ; Ley 1994; Davidson and Lees, 2005). The active involvement of the 
state is  ingrained into the whole processes of orchestrating, facilitating and implementing 
gentrification, as demonstrated in all three waves of gentrification, which not only featur es 
strong entrepreneurial endeavours, but also is integrated in the process of nation building , 
power consolidation , and social governance,  especially in  the third -wave gentrification . These 
distinct characteristics necessitate a more holistic yet nuanced analysis of China‟s state -led 
gentrification through the analytical framework of „state -centred triangular embedment‟ 
proposed in this essay , which enables a balanced and dynamic view of the delicate 
entanglements of the state, market and society  amidst  the surging waves of gentrification.         
  
