Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie – 2024, DOI:10.1111/tesg.12575, Vol. 115, No. 1, pp. 81–95.
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.EXPANDING FRONTIERS OF COMMERCIAL 
GENTRIFICATION: RENT GAP AND SEQUENTIAL 
GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI OF CHENGDU, 
CHINA
XING HUANG * & HAO GU **
*School of Architecture, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510641, China.  
E-mail: huangxing57@scut.edu.cn
**School of Public Administration, Hunan University, Changsha, 410082, China. E- mail: haogu@hnu.
edu.cn (Corresponding author)
Received: November 2022; accepted May 2023
ABSTRACT
Gentrification has become one of the planetary processes in reorganising urban spaces. China is 
not immune to the process. Generations of scholarship on gentrification in China have generated 
considerable insights into its varying logics, morphologies and mechanism in the Chinese context. 
Yet, most research tends to focus on a geographically well- demarcated area, driven either by the 
state or capital, while overlooking the externalities of these projects over time. Through the notion 
of the rent gap and the empirical case of Taikoo Li in Chengdu, we develop the new dynamic 
formation of the rent gap theoretical framework to explain how a commercial gentrification 
project changed the urban centre space and trigger new rounds of the effects of gentrification in 
surrounding neighbourhoods. In so doing, we underscore the hitherto overlooked roles of time 
and scale in theorising rent gap and gentrification in China.
Key words: commercial gentrification; rent gap; surrounding neighbourhood; external effects; 
Chengdu
INTRODUCTION
Rapid urban changes have restructured urban 
spaces in the global urbanisation process (Peck 
& Tickell  2002). Gentrification, a universal 
geographic phenomenon that occurs in cities, 
has been studied by urban scholars in both 
the global north and south (Lees et al.  2008). 
Gentrification is indeed ‘a change in the popu-
lation of land- users such that the new users are 
of a higher socio- economic status than the pre-
vious users, together with an associated change 
in the built environment through a reinvest-
ment in fixed capital’ (Clark  2010, p. 258). 
With this in mind, Neil Smith, who founded 
the theory of rent gap in 1979, indicates that ‘the rent gap is the disparity between the po-
tential ground rent level and the actual ground 
rent capitalised under the present land use’ 
(Smith  1979, p. 545). As a result, the rent gap 
is a critical factor in attracting capital to trigger 
the emergence of gentrification, as well as the 
flagship theory to explanation the production 
for gentrification.
Since the 21st century, the urban govern-
ment has become a consummate agent to 
carry out neoliberal urban policy to transfer 
every piece of urban space into the global 
market. Consequently, gentrification has 
become a global urban strategy for attract-
ing global capital investment driven by state 
and local governments. In the process of 

XING HUANG AND HAO GU82
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
gentrification, different stakeholders asso-
ciated with their interests would like to re-
furbish declining neighbourhoods and/or 
develop new fashionable buildings on brown-
fields to accommodate urban high- income 
classes, which causes different types of resi-
dential gentrification, such as new- built gen-
trification (Davidson & Lees  2005), super 
gentrification (Lees  2012) and studentifica-
tion (Smith  2005), and so on. It is notable 
that the form of commercial gentrification 
is different from residential gentrification, 
which emphasises changes in the built envi-
ronment, consumer groups and shop rents 
(Hubbard  2017), which can be viewed as the 
main core engine to change the urban land-
scape (Burnett  2014; Lees et al.  2018). For 
example, commercial capital prefers to build 
up business and cultural landmarks in the city 
centre in order to continuously attract capital 
accumulation and investment (Zukin  1987; 
Jeong et al.  2015). At the beginning of the 
1980s, China witnessed the most significant 
and rapid urbanisation process in the world. 
To compare with the Western urbanisation 
context, Hamnett (2020, p. 696) claims that 
‘the fundamental difference is that the pro-
cess is usually state- initiated, takes place rap-
idly, maintained by mass displacement, and 
can be on a huge scale’. This means that 
local governments play a crucial role in urban 
development, especially in an urban cen-
tre where the location advantage can attract 
global and national capital investment.
As the discussion above shows, capital is a 
crucial power in creating commercial gentrifi-
cation in urban space in both North and South, 
which means the rent gap theory still pres-
ents a strong explanation for the production 
of gentrification. In this paper, we argue that 
the rent gap theory should be developed its 
theoretical connotation to adapt the rapid ur -
banisation within Chinese contexts, especially 
research on commercial gentrification and 
pay attention to its effects on the surrounding 
neighbourhoods. Using a case study of Taikoo 
Li in Chengdu, China, therefore, this paper 
will be addressed two key research questions: 
(1) what is the new form of rent gap in the con-
text of China’s commercial gentrification; and 
(2) what are the effects of commercial gentrifi-
cation on surrounding neighbourhoods.To address the questions, this structure of 
the paper is cleft into four sections: Section 
“Introduction” is a review of the waves of gen-
trification and the rent gap theory studies in 
both global and Chinese contexts and provides 
a new formation of rent gap model to explain 
how the process of commercial gentrification 
changes the urban centre. Section “Theoretical 
Debate and Framework” introduces the back-
ground of the case study and methodology 
for data collection. Section “Research Design” 
contains empirical findings to present the pro-
cess and effects of commercial gentrification in 
the studying case. The final section is given the 
conclusion and discussion for this study.
THEORETICAL DEBATE AND 
FRAMEWORK
Although the rent gap theory can explain how 
gentrification can be activated, debates on the 
production of gentrification still arouse differ -
ent scholars from different fields.
The wave of gentrification globally and 
in China – When gentrification research 
has become the frontier in urban studies, 
most scholars commonly consider that 
there are five waves of gentrification in the 
global process (Hackworth & Smith  2001; 
Aalbers  2019). The first wave of gentrification 
is small- scale neighbourhood upgrading by 
the middle- class returning to the city centre 
(Murphy  2008). After that, the second wave 
of gentrification showed the political power 
of the government, which encourages private 
capital to invest in the housing market in 
the inner city (Ball  1994). After the 1990s, 
neoliberalism changed the global economic 
structure, and global cities played a vital role 
in the global economic system. Smith (2002) 
indicates that gentrification is a global urban 
strategy that creates large- scale multifaceted 
urban regeneration, which has changed most 
urban socio- economic landscapes by the third 
wave of gentrification. With this in mind, Lees 
et al. (2008) indicate that the financialisation 
of the housing market associated with the 
fourth wave of gentrification has slightly 
crossed the European- American heartland. 
However, this gentrification wave accelerated 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RENT GAP AND SEQUENTIAL GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI OF CHENGDU, CHINA83
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
the polarisation of the urban socio- economic 
structure. Recently, the rising financial 
sectors, international real estate and 
economic platforms (e.g. Airbnb) have been 
encouraged by the state financial supplement 
to redevelop urban space, which forms 
finance- led gentrification, as well as the fifth 
wave of gentrification (Amore et al. 2022).
In line with the global research on the five 
waves of gentrification, He (2019) argues that 
there are only three waves of gentrification 
within the Chinese context. China’s first wave 
of gentrification occurred in the mid- 1990s 
in large cities, such as Beijing, Shanghai and 
Guangzhou, due to the demand for quality 
housing and urban infrastructure. The local 
governments aimed to demolish old buildings 
and improve the infrastructure in urban cen-
tres to rebuild urban neighbourhoods. This is 
because China experienced less improvement 
in the housing market and infrastructure be-
fore the economic reform; moreover, most 
urban neighbourhoods were still impacted by 
the work- unit system (He & Wu  2009). After 
the new millennium, China accelerated eco-
nomic reform, encouraging private capital in 
the housing market to meet the demands of 
the increasing number of households belong-
ing to the upper- middle class. This caused the 
second wave of gentrification across most cit-
ies. Importantly, local governments managed 
capital flow to the urban centre, which often 
transformed the centre city space into a busi-
ness and cultural landmark (Zheng  2011). It 
is worth noting that the second- wave gentri-
fication was related to the emerging neolib-
eral capital accumulation through land and 
housing commodification and privatisation. 
Moreover, in 2010, the central government 
launched a large- scheme housing redevelop-
ment programme. This could be recognised 
as China’s third wave of gentrification. State- 
led financialisation was introduced by the 
central government to provide economic re-
sources for long- term housing reconstruction 
and ensure national housing redevelopment. 
Moreover, local governments launched a new 
financial platform for housing redevelopment. 
He (2019, p. 31) indicates that the local financ-
ing platform ‘is established through a constant 
capital injection by the local government and 
restructured into an “operational entity”, which can directly undertake construction activities 
and operate municipal utilities’. This new fi-
nancial platform enhances the government’s 
power to lead urban housing and neighbour -
hood redevelopment and attracts different 
scales of capital for urban development.
Compared to the first and second waves 
of gentrification globally, the state has shown 
power at the beginning of gentrification 
within Chinese contexts due to the ‘top- down’ 
political- economic system. When gentrifica-
tion became the global urban development 
strategy, the state played the leading role in the 
Chinese and global context. China’s second 
wave of gentrification introduced private capi-
tal globally; it transformed the socio- economic 
centre space, a form of commercial gentrifica-
tion in urban centres. Notably, the financial-
isation of the housing market is the driving 
force behind gentrification in the global con-
text. In the Chinese context, the government 
aims to manage local financing platforms to 
improve the quality of housing, reap tax reve-
nue and avoid the negative effects of gentrifi-
cation (e.g. displacement of the lower- income 
group). Therefore, China’s gentrification is 
a government- led model involving different 
stakeholders.
The rent gap theory in the global and 
Chinese research – In the early model of 
1979, Neil Smith’s rent gap theory explains 
the profit gap between potential ground 
rent (PGR) and capitalised ground rent 
(CGR) is keen to attract productive capital 
to change whether the new residential 
building or new commercial building was 
based in the city centre (Smith  1979). 
Therefore, the rent gap theory provides 
powerful explanations for exploring capital 
return cities. In addition, Clark  (1995, p. 
1489) states that the rent gap ‘cannot be 
divorced from the societal relations and 
power struggles involved in the creation and 
capture of values in the built environment’. 
Thus, capital is not only the unique power 
to redevelop declining neighbourhoods, but 
also political powers could decide on the 
developed areas (Darling  2005). At the same 
time, the entrepreneurial urban government 
became a new form of urban governance 
which dominated urban (re)development 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XING HUANG AND HAO GU84
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
after the 1980s (Harvey  1989), the central 
and local governments can be viewed as 
the primary political powers to attract the 
private capital investment and create the 
rent gap (Bourassa  1993; Hammel  1999). For 
example, the local government of Santiago 
in Chile aims to attract private capital by 
revising building regulations while reducing 
national financial expenditure on housing 
upgrading (Lopez- Morales  2011). In effect, 
the government enlarged the potential 
ground capital, increasing land value to gain 
more capital investments. In New York City, 
Teresa  (2019) finds that changes in rent 
control laws provide new avenues for the 
government, which can increase potential 
rent to attract financial sector investment in 
the housing markets.
Undoubtedly, some Chinese scholars 
found that the government plays a key role in 
the creation of the rent gap, in order to pro-
mote urban (re)development. First, using the 
case study of Guangzhou, Ding (2019) found 
that transforming potential ground rent into 
capitalised ground rent is the crucial mech-
anism that leads to city’s central redevelop-
ment. This is because the government can 
create different regulated conditions to co-
operate with investors, which realise various 
forms of rent gaps. Second, through a com-
parative study of high- end commercial ven-
ues in Nanjing’s inner city in 2008 and 2018, 
Song et al.  (2017) believed that the pursuit 
of the ‘commercial rent gap’ by local gov-
ernments and capital, as well as the growing 
demand for fashion and high- end cultural 
consumption from young and high- income 
groups, produced the commercial gentrifica-
tion process in the inner city. Thus, the inner 
city is always a crucial location for creating 
a commercial rent gap. Recently, the effects 
of the rent gap in the top school district of 
Nanjing’s inner city have forced low- income 
residents to move out of the school district 
because of the school enrolment policy de-
signed by the city government and education-  
led gentrification in the top school district 
(Liu et al. 2021).
In summary, a government’s urban policy 
can create a rent gap in an urban space in 
the global context, significantly affecting the 
urban development process. In China, the government makes policies that subsequently 
create a rent gap in urban centres. Other 
stakeholders can also drive the PGR or capital 
ground rent (CGR) to create a rent gap.
The new theoretical framework of the 
rent gap in China – As discussed above, 
the government can create a rent gap, 
thus leading to global urban development. 
Therefore, this study argues that the rent gap 
theory could be reconsidered in the context 
of China’s gentrification processes in urban 
centres, revealing the different stakeholders’ 
motivations and corporations to form a new 
theoretical framework. This new dynamic 
form of the rent gap (see Figure  1) explains 
how different stakeholders create different 
types of rent gaps (e.g. rent gap- 1 due to a 
government- led development, rent gap- 2 due 
to an enterprise- led development, and rent 
gap- 3 due to a merchant- led development).
Rent gap- 1  – It is developed by the government 
to gain land finance income and bureaucratic 
promotion. In 1994, the central government 
introduced the ‘tax- sharing system’ between 
the central and local governments. It stipulated 
that the central and local governments share 
the primary tax type of all local enterprises 
and the value- added tax (F.Z. Zhou  2007). In 
particular, 75 per cent of the value- added tax 
income belongs to the central government, 
while the remaining 25 per cent belongs to 
the local government. This separation reduces 
the income of enterprises operated by local 
governments. L.A. Zhou  (2007) indicated 
that in the evaluation criteria of bureaucratic 
promotion, the championship important 
lies in the economic performance of local 
government leaders. Financial performance 
(e.g. a city’s gross domestic product), has 
naturally become the leading indicator in 
assessing cadres’ official promotions. As a 
result, local governments use administrative 
powers (e.g. demolition of low- quality housing, 
expropriation of cultivated land and removal 
of polluting industries) to gain land finance 
(e.g. land transfer fees from investment 
enterprises), changing other types of lands 
into urban construction lands (Wu 2002).
Based on the new rent gap model, it is 
shown that P 1 (the government) collects 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RENT GAP AND SEQUENTIAL GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI OF CHENGDU, CHINA85
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
land for urban development. The rent gap 
between CGR- 2 (the value of urban construc-
tion land) and PGR- 2 (the value of other 
types of land changed into urban construc-
tion lands in the land market) forms rent 
gap- 1, which is the local government’s ‘land 
finance’ income. Thus, the government cre-
ates a monopoly rent and an absolute space 
(e.g. clearance of declining local neighbour -
hoods and abandoned brownfields) to attract 
investment. This type of rent gap led to the 
beginning of China’s gentrification. In partic-
ular, the urban centre space in Chinese cities 
is considered the first wave of redevelopment 
due to the huge potential value for the gov-
ernment’s tax income and commercial capi-
tal accumulation.
Rent gap- 2  – It is driven by capital development 
to gain profit under marketisation. 
After the government reconstructs the 
urban centre and completes the investment attraction, capital enters the land market and 
drives space development (shown as the 
P2 stage in Figure  1). This means that the 
enterprise developer purchases land use 
rights from time t 2 to create a commercial/
residential space and contain the state and 
private capital for profit, which is viewed 
as a relational space by capital practice 
(Harvey 1989).
When the government controls the in-
dustrial structure and floor area ratio of 
housing buildings, the PGR may increase 
due to the better accessibility of the plot 
and the surrounding environment (Hong & 
Zhang  2016). In effect, the rate of increase 
of PGR- 3 slows down, when the government 
drives the increase in PGR- 2. Moreover, from 
time t2, the land market breaks away from 
the government’s dominance, while the neo-
liberal market increases land value (Jiang et 
al. 2021). Thus, CGR- 3 also increases due to 
market forces. In other words, rent gap- 2 is Figure 1. The new model of rent gap in urban China. CGR, capital ground rent; P, entry time; PGR, potential ground 
rent. 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XING HUANG AND HAO GU86
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
the disparity between the expected profits 
from the capital development of PGR and 
the practical profits from the capital develop-
ment of CGR. It is formed due to enterprise-  
led development.
At the same time, enterprise- led develop-
ment enhances commercial capital activities, 
causing commercial gentrification to change 
the socio- economic landscape in urban central 
spaces. This is because commercial capital in-
vestors prefer building business and cultural 
landmarks that show the city’s iron image 
(Gonzalez  2016), a process that attracts com-
mercial gentrifiers globally by focusing on aes-
thetics (Paker 2018).
Rent gap- 3  – It is created by merchants 
to gain profit through the effects of 
commercial gentrification. After commercial 
gentrification took place through an 
enterprise- led development, the urban 
space’s landscape changed, and new city 
landmarks were created. From time t 3 
onwards, rent gap- 3 is formed through 
merchant- led development. This type of rent 
gap is affected by commercial gentrification. 
Successful business and cultural landmarks 
attract different consumers (Pratt  2009). 
Some capital investors, such as merchants, 
prefer to operate small- scale businesses 
near commercial urban spaces to attract 
more consumers (Zukin et al.  2009). Thus, 
merchants (P 3) create a new rent gap.
PGR- 4, in this stage, will grow slowly, 
this is because the land is located near the 
centre space, and the other two actors, the 
government and enterprises, have not yet 
developed this adjacent space. The two main 
types of merchants (the businesspeople and 
the property- letting agency) increased CGR- 4 
and CGR- 5, creating a gap with PGR- 4 (see 
Figure  1). This is because merchants tend to 
build commercial spaces, increasing housing 
rental prices and land value. More specifically, 
some businesspeople open restaurants and 
retail shops to attract gentrifiers’ consump-
tion; thus, CGR- 4 is driven by businesspeo-
ple, partially forming a rent gap- 3. Second, 
a property- letting agency also develops the 
local rental housing market; it attracts mar -
ginalised social groups to increase CGR- 5. 
Thus, the rent gap- 3 is caused by the effects of commercial gentrification, which may be 
formed by (1) the rent gap created by a local 
small- scale shop and (2) a local property-  
letting agency. It seems likely that this new 
form of rent gap (rent gap- 3) is a result of 
sequential commercial gentrification in the 
urban centre. Consequently, the rent gap is 
a dynamic formation influenced by various 
stakeholders in urban development (Pastak 
et al. 2019).
RESEARCH DESIGN
The case study of Taikoo Li in Chengdu – 
Taikoo Li was a commercial block in the Daci 
Temple community (DTC), which is based in 
Jinjiang District, Chengdu. When the three 
important capital groups of Wharf (Holdings) 
Limited, Swire Group and Sino- Ocean Group 
developed this area, this community changed 
into a global chain commercial block named 
Taikoo Li in Chengdu. From the perspective 
of geographic location, Taikoo Li is adjacent to 
Shudu Avenue in the north, the Fuhe River in 
the east, Hongxing Road in the west and East 
Avenue in the south. It is adjacent to the com-
mercial pedestrian street of Chunxi Road and 
Tianfu Square in the centre of Chengdu. It is 
the central zone of Chengdu and has a superi-
or geographical location and profound cultur -
al heritage (see Figure 2).
Since the 1980s, DTC and its surrounding 
neighbourhoods gradually have shown a rel-
ative decline over time due to the effects of 
rapid urbanisation. However, the neighbour -
hood characteristics of DTC are relatively 
diverse. Traditional low- rise courtyards and 
work- unit courtyards form a pattern of differ -
ent residential areas scattered around each 
other. Since 2000, DTC has been demolished 
and commercially renovated under the joint ef-
forts of the Chengdu Municipal Government, 
Wharf (Holdings) Limited, the Swire Group 
and the Sino- Ocean Group. The old tradi-
tional residential courtyards inhabited initially 
by low- income groups have been demolished 
and rebuilt into high- end consumption spaces, 
entertainment and leisure, tourism and sight-
seeing places for high- level consumption 
shopping malls, namely Taikoo Li. The resi-
dential land used by the low- income group was 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RENT GAP AND SEQUENTIAL GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI OF CHENGDU, CHINA87
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
replaced by commercial land that served the 
high- income group.
Methodology – This study used participatory 
observation and semi- structured interviews 
to collect primary data and conduct a follow- 
up field survey on the case of Taikoo Li in 
four different stages. Specifically, the primary 
data come from the interview records of 
local residents, consumers, government staff, 
merchants and tenants, with a total of 51 
interviewees. At the same time, the author 
collected local policy documents and news 
reports as secondary materials to analyse the 
attitude and position of the government and 
media in the development area. It is important 
that the authors have always maintained social 
contact with the interviewees during all phases, 
which can show the dynamics and integrity of 
the research object to improve the reliability of 
the research data.
The first phase occurred in November 2012. It 
mainly investigates local residents who were trans-
ferred near Taikoo Li to collect data concerning 
the relocation plan during the development pro-
cess and records the lifestyle of residents before 
development, the interaction between residents 
and the government, the built environment and 
the layout of the surrounding shops.The second phase was conducted in August 
2017. Interviews were conducted with high- 
end commercial consumer groups in Taikoo 
Li; their consumption patterns were recorded. 
Each interview lasted for approximately one to 
three hours. At the same time, interviews were 
conducted with shop owners, staff members 
and residents around the development zone to 
record changes in shops, residents’ lifestyles, 
attitudes towards commercial transformation 
and others.
The third phase was conducted in 
November 2019. This is an important time 
for in- depth interviews with local govern-
ment staff, residents of surrounding residen-
tial areas and tenants. It involved more than 
one hour of in- depth interviews with the sub-
district office, local police station and neigh-
bourhood committee staff members. This is 
important to supplement the data gaps in 
previous research and comprehensively un-
derstand the details of the entire develop-
ment process and its stages.
The fourth phase is December 2021. It is 
used to supplement the survey in the above 
stages, reconfirming and recording the person-
nel composition, distribution of consumption 
formats, consumer characteristics, residents’ 
lifestyles, the layout of surrounding businesses, Figure 2. The location of the case study.
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XING HUANG AND HAO GU88
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
and living conditions of surrounding residents 
and tenants in the case area to ensure the re-
liability of the survey data. Interviews were 
mainly conducted with relevant leaders of the 
subdistrict, local police stations and developer 
groups.
GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI AND ITS 
EXPANDING FRONTIERS
Taikoo Li’s commercial gentrification pro-
cess can be divided into four stages, reflect-
ing a gradual evolution. Each underlines the 
different characteristics and effects of the 
rent gap.
The First stage (1980– 2001) –  Since DTC 
was assigned as a historical and cultural 
protection area in the overall planning of 
Chengdu in the 1980s, its commercial de-
velopment has been confined. As the sur -
rounding areas (such as Chunxi Road) are 
developing, DTC begins to decline, and the 
infrastructure and environment continue to 
deteriorate. However, the deep cultural her -
itage and gradually declining old residen-
tial areas make DTC a potential space for 
gentrification.
The second stage (2002– 2010) –  Influenced 
by the notion of ‘city marketing and urban en-
trepreneurialism’, the local government began 
to carry out large- scale transformation in this 
area, while a large number of residents were 
displaced from their homes. However, the gov-
ernment’s motivation for urban transforma-
tion is blocked due to a lack of management 
means, insufficient funds and poor develop-
ment concepts.
The third stage (2011– 2014) –  The local 
state retreats to the second tier through plan-
ning means and policies and has handed over 
development rights to international develop-
ers since 2011. In this case, the urban rede-
velopment of DTC rapidly improved. With 
the huge investment of international devel-
opers such as Wharf (Holdings) Limited, 
Swire Group and Sino- Ocean Group, most 
DTC areas have been built into cultural and 
commercial shopping blocks. Consequently, 
Taikoo Li was built and officially put into op-
eration in 2014, becoming a new landmark in 
Chengdu.The fourth stage (2015– present) –  The con-
struction of Taikoo Li was very successful in 
Chengdu’s urban development. The new com-
mercial blocks attract a large number of con-
sumers, and the surrounding areas of Taikoo Li 
have begun to be affected, and a wave of recent 
gentrification has progressed. Simultaneously, 
due to the increase in development costs and 
enhancement of residents’ awareness of rights 
protection, demolition in the Taikoo Li area 
ended in 2013.
The entire process of commercial gentrifi-
cation in Taikoo Li has primarily changed the 
built environment and reconstructed the struc-
ture of the social space. The following sections, 
corresponding to different stages, will specifi-
cally illustrate and analyse the process of gen-
trification and the operation of the rent gap in 
Taikoo Li.
The first stage: The preparation of the rent 
gap – Before the Taikoo Li commercial block 
construction, DTC was famous for Daci 
Temple, a millenarian Buddhist temple. This 
area is one of the traditional dwellings in the 
centre of Chengdu with scattered bungalows, 
diverse residents and an active life. Since the 
1980s, the Chengdu government has proposed 
the Conservation Planning of Historical 
Blocks (CPHB); thus, the neighbourhood 
was protected from urban redevelopment 
and demolition. According to an official 
from the subdistrict, a majority of housing 
in this neighbourhood was built before 1949 
and during the 1950s. Along with the serious 
deterioration of housing year by year, DTC has 
become a decrepit area. As such, residents with 
strong economic capacity moved out of this 
neighbourhood, while those left behind were 
low- income groups.
As a traditional old neighbourhood lo-
cated in the central area, the DTC also 
shows the complex property rights of res-
idents. Housing owners and immigrant 
tenants were mixed in one dwelling. Even 
ownership of a house belongs to more than 
one person. Moreover, because of the ‘pro-
tection’ of CPHB, the old and dilapidated 
neighbourhood cannot be demolished to 
new- build constructions. These reasons hin-
der the development and investment from 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RENT GAP AND SEQUENTIAL GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI OF CHENGDU, CHINA89
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
the local state and developers in this area, 
which means that the actual rent was very low 
during that period. However, the centre of 
Chengdu and the surrounding area of DTC 
experienced dramatic urban development 
during the 1990s. Specifically, Chunxi Road, 
a street next to DTC, has become the most fa-
mous and prosperous commercial pedestrian 
street, and the DTC is within its radiation 
range. These facts have driven an increase in 
the potential rent of the DTC. As a result, a 
rent gap is generated in preparation.
The second stage: State leading, displacement 
and activation of the rent gap – As the real 
landlord, the government in urban China has 
enough power to deal with urban land and 
transform urban spaces. Chengdu’s local state 
can decide the direction of urban development 
through policymaking, document modification 
and other administrative means. Under 
the influence of city marketing and urban 
entrepreneurialism, Chengdu’s local state has 
intended to develop a dilapidated area of DTC 
since 2000. The first urban redevelopment 
in DTC sponsored by the local state was the 
project of the most considerable low- lying 
shantytown transformation, which started 
in 2002. The local authority has invested 
approximately 1.3 billion RMB in embarking 
on the urban redevelopment project (Chen & 
Peng  2002). Since then, the local government 
issued a new planning, ‘Urban Design and 
Historic Block Protection and Renovation 
Planning of Chunxi Road and Daci Temple 
area of Chengdu’ in September 2003, 
proposing to turn DTC into a commercial 
district of local traditional history, culture and 
art, including an international shopping mall 
and tourist blocks. Subsequently, other policy 
documents of urban planning, including ‘the 
Detailed Regulatory Planning of Daci Temple 
Area, Chengdu, 2005’ and ‘the Planning of the 
Core Protection Zone of Daci Temple Area, 
2009’ were introduced successively, intending 
to build a new commercial block of mixed 
Sichuan architectural culture, folk tourism and 
religion.
Along with the implementation of these 
planning projects, residents in DTC have to 
face large- scale demolition of their housing and subsequent displacement. Except for Daci 
Temple and a few historical relics, the major -
ity of buildings on 17, 2366.7 m2 of land are 
demolished, while the total area of housing 
demolition reaches 230,000 m2 and about 3667 
households have been displaced. According to 
interviews with officials from the subdistrict, 
some residents received cash- based compensa-
tion, while others received in- kind compensa-
tion in resettlement houses spread within the 
suburban area outside of the 3rd Ring Road 
(Figure  3). Indeed, residents reflect a nuanced 
response to displacement. On one hand, con-
sidering abysmal housing conditions, residents 
desire to move into new housing. On the other 
hand, remote settlement means the loss of a 
convenient lifestyle and a break in social co-
hesion. As the 63- years- old original residents 
stated,
In truth, I want to move into a brand- new house 
to change the lousy situation … dark, damp, 
and crowded house is not good … but I cannot 
imagine that the resettlement housings are too 
far away from the original place … almost near 
the contrary side … and I have not contacted my 
former neighbours … we have known each other 
since childhood…. (residents, Ms. Yu, 63)
Whether in cash or in kind, compensation 
refers to building value but not capitalised Figure 3. The locations of resettlement housings for 
displaced residents.
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XING HUANG AND HAO GU90
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
ground rent. Residents responded that the 
payment could not afford the surrounding 
commercial housing. This fact reflects the fact 
that the local state wants to recover the land 
at the lowest cost; thus, the value of compen-
sation is only equal to the value of dilapidated 
buildings. Meanwhile, the local government 
cleans up old and dilapidated housing and as-
sembles the land in order to trigger a surge in 
potential ground rent. Consequently, the rent 
gap widened significantly. At this stage, the 
government is the only actor and leader, with-
out the participation of developers. However, 
due to lack of experience in commercial de-
velopment advanced business philosophy, 
and insufficient funds, the project has to be 
stranded in 2010. Although the monopolistic 
behaviour of the local state ultimately brings 
about urban redevelopment, planning pol-
icies and demolition projects stimulate the 
expansion of the rent gap, which provides a 
good opportunity for developers to intervene 
in the next stage.
The third stage: Government sponsored 
commercial gentrification – Since 2011, 
international developers, comprising Wharf 
(Holdings) Limited, Swire Group and the 
Sino- Ocean Group, have obtained the power 
of redevelopment in DTC from the local 
state. The government retires from the 
leading post but still holds the final authority. 
Government sponsored commercial 
gentrification that began to burgeon. About 
24.9 billion RMB has been invested in this 
project. With abundant funds and rich 
experience, international developers plan to 
embark on commercial development using 
culture as a gimmick. They hailed Hong Kong 
Oval Partnership Ltd., an internationally 
famous architectural design company, to 
design Taikoo Li and create an architectural 
landscape combining Chinese and Western 
styles. As for investment attraction, they 
target international first- line luxury brands 
and creative cultural brands to fascinate 
high- end consumer groups, creating a high-  
grade commercial space atmosphere and a 
symbolic consumption space for the high-  
income class. Developers’ requirement for 
the newly settled brands is stringent, as the 
interview with a staff of developers shows:We have strict requirements regarding the types 
and brands of stores and enterprises that come 
here. Generally, brands of lower- grade or non- 
leisure shops cannot operate here … Taikoo Li 
is a high- end brand in Hong Kong, Beijing, etc. 
Chengdu, where the first inland branch is lo-
cated, will definitely have higher requirements 
…. (staff in Swire Group, Mr. Wang, 43)
It can be seen that in the new consumption 
spaces of Taikoo Li, almost all retail brands 
have set up flagship stores. It contains first- tier 
luxury brands such as Hermes, LV, Givenchy, 
Dior, Chanel and Gucci, as well as many 
Michelin star- rated restaurants, high- rank cafés 
and other leisure shops. The spatial aggrega-
tion of various new high- end luxury brands has 
improved the consumption standard in situ, 
filtering the social class of consumers and im-
plementing commercial gentrification.
Through investment and development by 
international developers, the potential grand 
rent in Taikoo Li is increased to a new level. 
The settlement of many luxury shops and 
the consequent consumption of gentrifiers 
brings another wave of capital accumulation. 
Therefore, capitalised grand rent has been 
promoted and illustrated in the consumption 
of the new high- rank commercial space. In 
doing so, developers have obtained significant 
earnings, as well as the local state. Specifically, 
Taikoo Li has brought about 2 billion in the 
government’s land financial income, and the 
tax created by shops in Taikoo Li accounts for 
more than 30 per cent of the entire Jinjiang 
District. Apparently, developers’ involvement 
has opened up capital financing channels, 
thereby making the land market return to 
the classic rent gap model. Consequently, the 
potential land rent is raised again, while the 
local government– developer collaboration has 
gained profit rent under marketisation.
The fourth stage: The expanding frontier 
of commercial gentrification – Along with 
the progress of commercial gentrification in 
Taikoo Li, its surrounding neighbourhoods 
have gradually transformed since 2015. As a 
witness through the process of commercial 
gentrification in Taikoo Li, these old and 
declining neighbourhoods have not been 
demolished and still remain in situ, in contrast 
to the new and high- ended Taikoo Li on the 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RENT GAP AND SEQUENTIAL GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI OF CHENGDU, CHINA91
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
landscape. This result is partly due to the 
collaboration between the local government 
and developers who renovated the facade of the 
surrounding neighbourhoods to improve the 
aesthetics of Taikoo Li and increase investments. 
An interviewee stated the following:
The government sponsored the renovation of 
the façade of the declining neighbourhoods to 
maintain the area’s aesthetically pleasing land-
scape. We can attract more investment in these 
new shops and beautify the centre of this city. 
(Director in the Subdistrict Office, Mr Chen, 45)
After that, newly built commercial spaces at-
tract new high- income consumers and create 
new business opportunities for the surround-
ing neighbourhoods. In other words, new 
shops and stores have emerged and developed 
in these neighbourhoods to satisfy the gentri-
fier consumers from Taikoo Li (see Figure 4).
In fact, due to the spill- over effect from 
Taikoo Li, the rent of shops in surrounding neighbourhoods has rapidly grown in the 
past few years. In pace with the relocation of 
original lower- class residents from Taikoo Li, 
old shops catering to former customers are 
gradually replaced by new stores for higher-  
class consumers. Daily necessities shops such 
as groceries and vegetable/meat markets 
have decreased rapidly, while leisure shops 
for middle/high- income groups, including 
restaurants, cafés, local specialities and bou-
tiques, have become increasingly intensive. 
According to an interview with a real estate 
agent, the rent of shops surrounding Taikoo 
Li rose from an average of 4000 RMB in 
2015 to an average of 30,000 RMB in 2021, 
increasing nearly 7.5 times during recent six 
years. In this sense, the rent gap in surround-
ing neighbourhoods has been stimulated by 
Taikoo Li’s commercial gentrification, and 
asymptotic bottom- up commercial gentrifica-
tion occurs in surrounding neighbourhoods.
Figure 4. The developmen of new shops around Taikoo Li. Source: Authors. 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XING HUANG AND HAO GU92
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
Furthermore, the social structure of 
housing in surrounding neighbourhoods 
has changed. Based on the responses from 
a police officer in a local police station, it 
is understood that the proportion of ten-
ants was <40 per cent before the develop-
ment of Taikoo Li, while the proportion was 
more than 60 per cent after the completion 
of Taikoo Li. Undoubtedly, this change is 
strongly associated with commercial gentri-
fication. According to the investigation of 
our fieldwork, a majority of the increased 
tenants are working in Taikoo Li as clean-
ers, waiters/waitresses, busboys and other 
labourers. Because of the short distance and 
cheap rent of housing, these old dwellings 
in the surrounding neighbourhoods be-
come their best dormitories. Interestingly, 
these surrounding neighbourhoods are not 
threatened by commercial gentrification. In 
contrast, they have a mutually beneficial re-
lationship with Taikoo Li. Specifically, on the 
one hand, Taikoo Li, the new commercial 
block, needs a number of labourers to main-
tain its operations; on the other hand, old 
housing in surrounding neighbourhoods ac-
commodates these workers. This fact makes 
Taikoo Li and the surrounding old neigh-
bourhoods coexist.
Indeed, the commercial gentrification 
of Taikoo Li stimulated CGR in surround-
ing neighbourhoods. Based on the empir -
ical findings, we find two categories of rent 
gaps in the stage of extension of gentrifica-
tion: the rent gap by the power of business 
and the rent gap by the power of the housing 
agent. Specifically, commercial gentrification 
in Taikoo Li created a good commercial at-
mosphere and accumulated new gentrifier 
consumers, accelerating the growth of the 
CGR of shops. The owners of these shops 
are conscious of the opportunity to renovate 
and upgrade them to cater to higher- class 
consumers. In doing so, the rent gap by shop 
began to work, and a new wave of commer -
cial gentrification was initiated. Nevertheless, 
this loud environment and declining housing 
fall into disrepair, which does not seem good 
for residents. According to our fieldwork, 
the rent of housing remains stable (average 
2000 RMB/month), barely growing during 
recent years, which means that the CGR of housing has not increased. However, the 
cheap and near accommodations for labour -
ers working in Taikoo Li have strengthened 
the connection between Taikoo Li and its 
neighbouring communities. As a result, reha-
bilitation and social class upgrading only oc-
curred in the shops rather than the housing. 
This can prevent the surrounding old neigh-
bourhoods from large- scale demolition and 
induce asymptotic bottom- up commercial 
gentrification.
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
This study shows the dynamic formation 
of the rent gap theory in the context of 
Chinese urban redevelopment and the ef-
fects of commercial gentrification in urban 
centres. Initially, government bureaucratic 
promotion mainly affected the development 
of urban spaces led by local government 
executive officials. Therefore, rent gap- 1 is 
mainly due to political power; it increases 
the PGR in the market. With the spread of 
China’s neoliberal urban policy, rent gap- 2 
is created by profit- seeking enterprise devel-
opers. Simultaneously, commercial gentrifi-
cation has changed the urban centre space 
into a business and cultural landmark for the 
city’s image. However, this study argues that 
there is a new form of rent gap (rent gap- 3) 
led by merchants running small- scale busi-
nesses around the urban centre. The effects 
of commercial gentrification have changed 
the socio- economic landscape of local neigh-
bourhoods surrounding the urban centre. 
Notably, this was created by two important 
types of merchants— the businesspeople and 
the property- letting agency.
The new rent gap model is illustrated 
through this empirical research on Taikoo Li 
in Chengdu, China. Taikoo Li’s commercial 
gentrification is divided into four stages in 
which different driving forces and operating 
mechanisms are shown. In the first stage, the 
rent gap is not yet stimulated. The DTC’s ob-
stacles to development and decline prepared 
for the future risk in PGR. The simultaneous 
development of the urban centre during that 
period strengthens this possibility. In the sec-
ond stage, through planning policies, local 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RENT GAP AND SEQUENTIAL GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI OF CHENGDU, CHINA93
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
authorities use their administrative power to 
promote land clearance and development.
Along with the displacement of low-  
income residents, the local government ex-
ecutes land integration and withdrawal of 
property rights, increasing the PGR and the 
rent gap. In particular, differing from the 
West, the rent gap is triggered and affected 
by the local state even without other actors. 
In the third stage, the rent gap can conform 
to the market development rule after a power 
handover from the government to the de-
velopers. Due to the government’s prepara-
tions, large amounts of capital are invested 
by international developers in DTC; a new 
commercial block catering to high- end class 
consumers is manufactured, and commer -
cial gentrification gains mushroom growth. 
Here, the developers’ first wave of investment 
triggers and increases the PGR. Hence, the 
rent gap may expand and the CGR leases for 
realisation.
It is important to note that Taikoo Li’s com-
mercial gentrification caused another wave of 
commercial gentrification in the surrounding 
neighbourhoods during the fourth stage. That 
is, new commercial blocks strongly influenced 
the surrounding areas. Shops in surrounding 
neighbourhoods gradually transformed and 
upgraded, attracting new high- income con-
sumers from Taikoo Li. A new rent gap was 
created, channelling capital into these areas. 
However, the results of our study reveal that 
only the rent gap- 3 in shops in surrounding 
areas, other than the rent gap- 3 in housing, 
is increased by Taikoo Li’s commercial gen-
trification. Moreover, the low growth of the 
surrounding housing market may remain at a 
cheap and stable level. The surrounding hous-
ing can offer accommodation for low- income 
labourers working in Taikoo Li, maintaining 
the effective interaction between the new com-
mercial gentrified space and its surrounding 
neighbourhoods. In summary, the surround-
ing neighbourhoods can prevent a new wave of 
demolition to some extent and even improve 
the old neighbourhoods.
In this study, we attempted to build a dynamic 
formation of the rent gap theory to demon-
strate the process of urban China’s commercial 
gentrification and reveal the sequential gentri-
fication in the surrounding neighbourhoods. We find that commercial gentrification in the 
urban centre could stimulate new small- scale 
commercial gentrification in the surrounding 
neighbourhoods. However, compared with 
government- developer- sponsored, new- build 
and top- down forms, surrounding neighbour -
hoods witness spontaneous rehabilitation and 
bottom- up commercial gentrification. Notably, 
these two forms coexist. This is due to the alter -
nating leading roles of the government and the 
market in creating a rent gap. Based on this case 
study, there is a need for further research con-
centrating on neighbourhoods surrounding 
gentrified urban areas to study the social- spatial 
effects and consequences of China’s contem-
porary urban gentrification. Nevertheless, our 
research provides new insights into commercial 
gentrification and rent gaps beyond the West 
and contributes empirical results to the gentri-
fication study in the Global South.
ACKNO WLE DGE MENTS
We would thank Ernesto López- Morales and 
Yunpeng Zhang for organising this special issue and 
for their editorial work. We also wish to thank the 
editor and anonymous reviewers for their helpful 
comments and feedback. This research is supported 
by the National Social Science Funds of China 
(22FGLB002).
REFERENCES
Aalbers, M.B. (2019), Introduction to the Forum: 
From Third to Fifth- Wave Gentrification. 
Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 
110(1), pp. 1– 11.
Amore, A., C. Bernardi & P. Aravnitis (2022), The 
Impacts of Airbnb in Athens, Lisbon and Milan: 
A Rent Gap Theory Perspective. Current Issues in 
Tourism 25(20), pp. 3329– 3342.
Ball, M. (1994), The 1980s Property Boom. 
Environment & Planning A 26, pp. 671– 695.
Bourassa, S.C. (1993), The Rent Gap Debunked. 
Urban Studies 30(10), pp. 1731– 1744.
Burnett, K. (2014), Commodifying Poverty: 
Gentrification and Consumption in Vancouver’s 
Downtown Eastside. Urban Geography 35(2), pp. 
157– 176.
Chen, G. & Y. Peng (2002), 1.3 Billion Started the 
Reconstruction Project of Daci Temple Area, the 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XING HUANG AND HAO GU94
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
Largest Low- Lying Shantytown in Chengdu [EB/
OL] sina.com Available at <http://news.sina.
com.cn/c/2002- 06- 23/03216 13824.html>. (In 
Chinese).
Clark, E. (1995), The Rent Gap Re- Examined. 
Urban Studies 32(9), pp. 1489– 1503.
Clark, E. (2010), The Order and Simplicity 
of Gentrification –  A Political Challenge. In: 
L. Loretta, T. Slater & E. Wyly, (eds.), The 
Gentrification Reader, pp. 257– 262. London: 
Routledge Press.
Darling, E. (2005), The City in the Country: 
Wilderness Gentrification and the Rent Gap. 
Environment and Planning A 37, pp. 6– 1032.
Davidson, M. & L. Lees (2005), New- Build 
‘Gentrification’ and London’s Riverside Renaissance. 
Environment and Planning A 37, pp. 1165– 1190.
Ding, S.Y. (2019), Urban Renewal System from the 
Perspective of ‘Rent Gap’ Theory: A Case Study 
of Guangzhou. City Planning Review 12, pp. 69– 77 
(In Chinese).
Gonzalez, M. (2016), Authenticity as a Challenge in 
the Transformation of Beijing’s Urban Heritage: 
The Commercial Gentrification of the Guozijian 
Historic Area. Cities 59, pp. 48– 56.
Hackworth, J. & N. Smith (2001), The Changing 
State of Gentrification. Tijdschrift voor Economische 
en Sociale Geografie 92, pp. 464– 477.
Hammel, D.J. (1999), Gentrification and Land 
Rent: A Historical View of the Rent Gap in 
Minneapolis. Urban Geography 20(2), pp. 
116– 145.
Hamnett, C. (2020), Is Chinese Urbanisation 
Unique? Urban Studies 57(3), pp. 690– 700.
Harvey, D. (1989), From Managerialism to 
Entrepreneurialism: The Transformation in 
Urban Governance in Late Capitalism. Geografiska 
Annaler 71(1), pp. 3– 17.
He, S.J. (2019), Three Waves of State- Led 
Gentrification in China. Tijdschrift voor Economische 
en Sociale Geografie 110(1), pp. 26– 34.
He, S.J. & F.L. Wu (2009), China’s Emerging 
Neoliberal Urbanism: Perspectives from Urban 
Redevelopment. Antipode 41, pp. 282– 304.
Hong, S.J. & X.C. Zhang (2016), Rent Gap, 
Gentrification and Urban Redevelopment: The 
Reproduction of Urban Space Driven by Capital 
and Right. Urban Development Studies 3, pp. 101– 
110 (In Chinese).
Hubbard, P. (2017), The Battle for the High Street: 
Retail Gentrification, Class and Disgust, 1st edition, 
London: Palgrave Macmillan.Jeong, Y., J. Heo & C. Jung (2015), Behind the 
Bustling Street: Commercial Gentrification of 
Gyeongridan, Seoul. Social and Behavioral Sciences 
170, pp. 146– 154.
Jiang, K.K., Y.C. Gao & W.X. Song (2021), The 
Explanation of Ternary Rent Gap to Urban 
Renewal of China and Some Enlightenment. Urban 
Development Studies 9, pp. 101– 108 (In Chinese).
Lees, L. (2012), The Geography of Gentrification: 
Thinking through Comparative Urbanism. 
Progress in Human Geography 36(2), pp. 155– 171.
Lees, L., S. Annunziata & C.R. Alonso (2018), 
Resisting Planetary Gentrification: The Value of 
Survivability in the Fight to Stay Put. Annals of 
the American Association of Geographers 108(2), pp. 
346– 355.
Lees, L., T. Slater & E. Wyly (2008), Gentrification, 
1st edition, New York: Routledge.
Liu, C.Y., W.X.S. Deng, Q.Y. Wu & J. Gong (2021), 
Differentiation Under Capitalism: Genesis and 
Consequences of the Rent Gap. Environment & 
Planning A 53, pp. 1– 19.
Lopez- Morales, E. (2011), Gentrification by 
Ground Rent Dispossession: The Shadows Cast by 
Large- Scale Urban Renewal in Santiago de Chile. 
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 
35(2), pp. 330– 357.
Murphy, L. (2008), Third- Wave Gentrification in 
New Zealand: The Case of Auckland. Urban Studies 
45, pp. 2521– 2540.
Paker, J.N. (2018), Negotiating the Space between 
Avant- Garde and “Hip Enough”: Businesses and 
Commercial Gentrification in Wicker Park. City & 
Community 17(2), pp. 438– 460.
Pastak, I.E., T.T. Kindsiko, R. Kleinhans & V.H. 
Maarten (2019), Commercial Gentrification in 
Postindustrial Neighborhoods: A Dynamic View 
from an Entrepreneur’s Perspective. Tijdschrift 
voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 110(5), pp. 
588– 604.
Peck, J. & A. Tickell (2002), Neoliberalizing Space. 
Antipode 34, pp. 80– 404.
Pratt, A. (2009), Urban Regeneration: From the 
Arts ‘Feel Good’ Factor to the Cultural Economy: 
A Case Study of Hoxton, London. Urban Studies 
46(5), pp. 1041– 1061.
Smith, D.P. (2005), Studentification: the 
Gentrification Factory. In: R. Atkinson & G. 
Bridge, (eds.), Gentrification in a Global Context. 
London: Routledge.
Smith, N. (1979), Toward a Theory of Gentrification 
a Back to the City Movement by Capital, Not 
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RENT GAP AND SEQUENTIAL GENTRIFICATION IN TAIKOO LI OF CHENGDU, CHINA95
© 2023 Royal Dutch Geographical Society / Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig Genootschap.
People. Journal of the American Planning Association 
45(4), pp. 538– 585.
Smith, N. (2002), New Globalism, New Urbanism: 
Gentrification as Global Urban Strategy. Antipode 
34, pp. 427– 450.
Song, W.X., C.H. Liu, Y. Wang & Y.Q. Yuan (2017), 
Rent Gap and Gentrification in the Inner City of 
Nanjing. Acta Geographica Sinica 12, pp. 2115– 2130 
(In Chinese).
Teresa, B. (2019), New Dynamics of Rent Gap 
Formation in New York City Rent- Regulated 
Housing: Privatization, Financialization, and 
Uneven Development. Urban Geography 40(10), 
pp. 1399– 1421.
Wu, F. (2002), China’s Changing Urban 
Governance in the Transition Towards a 
More Market- Economy. Urban Studies 39, pp. 
1071– 1093.Zheng, J. (2011), ‘Creative Industry Clusters’ and 
the ‘Entrepreneurial City’ of Shanghai. Urban 
Studies 48, pp. 3561– 3582.
Zhou, F.Z. (2007), How to Make Money: 
Government and Farmers in Land Development 
and Transfer. Sociological Studies 1, pp. 49– 82 (In 
Chinese).
Zhou, L.A. (2007), Governing China’s Local 
Officials: An Analysis of Promotion Tournament 
Model. Economic Research Journal 7, pp. 36– 50 (In 
Chinese).
Zukin, S. (1987), Gentrification: Culture and Capital 
in the Urban Core. Annual Review of Sociology 13, 
pp. 129– 147.
Zukin, S., V. Trujillo, P. Frase, D. Jackson, T. Recuber 
& A. Walker (2009), New Retail Capital and 
Neighborhood Change: Boutiques and Gentrification 
in New York City. City & Community 8, pp. 47– 64.
 14679663, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tesg.12575 by South China University Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

